BY NOVEMBER 20TH 20 24
ELECTRONIC MEETING, THE OMNIBUS
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION, THIS
MEETING IS BEING HELD
ELECTRONICALLY BUT WE INTEND TO
CONDUCT A SIMILAR TO AN
IN-PERSON MEETING.
PUBLIC COMMENT WILL BE A
TELEPHONE ONLY TO SPEAK DURING
ANY OF THE PUBLIC COMMENT
OPPORTUNITIES PLEASE TWO ZERO
SIX THREE THREE SEVEN NINE
SEVEN TWO THREE AND
INTERMEETING ID NUMBER NINE
THREE FOUR SIX THREE EIGHT FIVE
TWO NINE ZERO SEVEN OR JOIN VIA
THE.
THIS INFORMATION IS ALSO
AVAILABLE ON THE PUBLIC AGENDA
IN THE PUBLIC NOTICE AND
SECTION OF THE CITY WEBSITE AND
ON THE BROADCAST OF THIS
MEETING ON CTM CHANNEL 16.
LET'S SEE SO WE HAVE TWO NEW
MEMBERS OF THE COMMISSION.
I'M VERY, VERY EXCITED ABOUT
CAPLING AND ERIC XIKAR ZAKHAR
I'LL LET YOU I'LL LET YOU
CORRECT ME TUCKER ZIKR.
GREAT.
BEFORE WE GET TO THEM THOUGH,
I'D LIKE TO NOTE THAT
COMMISSIONERS LISA CAMPBELL AND
RAHM SWARMY HAVE RECENTLY SENT
IN THEIR RESIGNATION FROM THE
COMMISSION SO BUT I DO WANT TO
THANK THEY WERE BOTH ON FOR
ABOUT A YEAR A LITTLE OVER A
YEAR OR SO.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH TO THEM FOR
THEIR TIME AND INPUT AND
EVERYTHING ON THIS COMMISSION.
BUT I'M VERY EXCITED FOR OUR
TWO NEW MEMBERS TO BE AT THE
SAME MEETING WHERE WE LOSE TO
GAIN TO SO AND I WANTED TO
INTRODUCE YOU GUYS AND IF YOU
WANT TO SAY A FEW WORDS, FEEL
FREE.
>> YOU CERTAINLY DON'T HAVE TO
.
IT'S VERY INFORMAL IF ANYONE
WANTS TO JUMP JUMP ON YOU AND
SAY ANYTHING AT ALL, I COULD
JUST MOVE.
>> I JUST WANTED TO SAY THANK
TO EVERYONE FOR THIS ALL THE
WORK YOU'VE DONE TO DATE AND
I'M JUST REALLY EXCITED TO BE A
PART OF THIS AND HAVE A LOT
OF LEARNING TO DO.
I'M SURE NEVER SAT ON A
COMMISSION BEFORE SO I TRY TO
DO ALL MY HOMEWORK AND I'M JUST
VERY EXCITED TO HOPEFULLY
CONTRIBUTE.
I'LL JUST SAY THE SAME AS KATE
KNEW TO COMMISSION WORK AND
VERY EXCITED TO DIG IN AND
START THINKING ABOUT WHAT'S
BEEN DONE IN THE PAST AND WHAT
WE CAN DO IN THE FUTURE.
YEAH, THANKS FOR YOUR INPUT.
DON'T BE SHY.
YOU KNOW, LIKE I SAID, IT'S A
PRETTY INFORMAL PROCESS THAT WE
FOLLOW AROUND HERE AND WE'RE
ALL WE'RE ALL JUST MEMBERS THE
PUBLIC OR YOU KNOW, THOSE OF US
THAT LARGE MEMBERS.
SO PLEASE JUMP IN WITH
QUESTIONS, COMMENTS ETC. SO ALL
RIGHT.
MOVING CHRIS, IF YOU COULD CALL
ROLL PLEASE.
>> YEAH, NOT A PROBLEM I'LL
WRONG YOU SEE HERE AND FROM
WHERE YOU'RE DRIVING WHEN YOUR
NAME HOLD ONTO NUMBER OF BRICKS
YOU'RE IN AMERICAN COLLEGES
HAVE TO TURN OFF MY SCREEN
VIDEO FOR A COUPLE OF MINUTES.
>> I'LL BE BACK.
NO PROBLEM.
COMMISSIONER BRODEN BANABA
COMMISSIONER LOU HERE FROM ANN
ARBOR, MICHIGAN OUT TO MY
MANAGER COMMISSIONER HERE FROM
ANN ARBOR, MICHIGAN.
>> YOU'LL HEAR FROM IN OUR
MISSION COMMISSIONER HERE IN
OUR COMMISSIONER CARPENTER
ADMITS THAT THESE EFFORTS HAVE
BEEN DIFFICULTIES.
SO I DON'T BELIEVE HE'S COMING
HERE BUT HE HE WILL BE BACK.
>> COMMISSIONER ZIKR HERE IN
ANN ARBOR, COMMISSIONER
HUTCHINSON HERE FROM ANN ARBOR
COMMISSIONAIRE LIVE HERE FROM
NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP.
COMMISSIONER MARGOLESE IS
ABSENT YOU TELLING MY SCHERBA
HERE
FROM TYRONNE TOWNSHIP
COMMISSIONER STOPGAP IS ABSENT
.
I BELIEVE WE HAVE QUORUM IN
CONGRESS.
THERE ARE TWO ITEMS ON
TONIGHT'S AGENDA APPROVAL
OF THE AGENDA AND APPROVAL
OF THE MINUTES FROM OCTOBER .
ARE THERE ANY MODIFICATIONS TO
THE CONSULTANT'S AGENDA SEEING
DUNCAN?
I HAVE A MOTION TO APPROVE THE
CONSENT AGENDA MOVED BY ONE
SECONDED BY AGAIN ALL THOSE IN
FAVOR OF THE MOTION.
PLEASE SAY YES OR RAISE YOUR
HAND.
>> YES, YES.
NO ALL THOSE OPPOSED PLEASE SAY
NO.
>> RAISE YOUR HAND.
THAT CONSENT AGENDA IS APPROVED
NOW WE GO INTO THE PUBLIC
PUBLIC COMMENT PORTION OF THE
MEETING.
THIS IS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR
PEOPLE TO SPEAK FOR UP TO THREE
MINUTES AGAIN PLEASE CALL TO
ZERO SIX THREE THREE SEVEN NINE
SEVEN TWO THREE AND THAT'S YOUR
MEETING AND NUMBER NINE THREE
FOUR SIX THREE EIGHT FIVE TWO
ZERO SEVEN OR CONNECTIVITIES AS
DESCRIBED ON THE AGENDA, CITY
STAFF WILL SELECT CALLERS THAT
HAVE RAISED THEIR HAND ONE BY
ONE USING THE LAST THREE DIGITS
OF YOUR PHONE NUMBER OR THE
PERSONS IN MIND IN ORDER TO
ELECTRONICALLY RAISE THEIR HAND
TO INDICATE YOUR DESIRE TO
SPEAK PLEASE PRESS STAR NINE ON
YOUR PHONE OR SELECT THE RIGHT
HAND BUTTON AND YOU'LL AN
AUTOMATED ANNOUNCEMENT THAT THE
HOST IS ALLOWING YOU TO SPEAK
WHEN SPEAKING.
PLEASE MOVE TO A QUIET AREA AND
ANY TELEVISION OR BACKGROUND
SOUND SO WE CAN HEAR YOU MORE
CLEARLY.
CHRIS, DO WE HAVE ANY MEMBERS
OF THE PUBLIC WHO WILL SPEAK AT
MADISON?
WE CAN GIVE THEM A FEW SECONDS
TO RAISE YOUR HANDS
.
>> OK, SEEING NO RESPONSE, I
BELIEVE WE'RE GOOD TO MOVE
FORWARD OR THANK YOU.
I WOULD LIKE TO NOTE THOUGH
THAT YOUR PACKET WOULD HAVE A
NUMBER OF EMAILS THAT HAVE BEEN
SENT THE COMMISSION.
>> SO AS ALWAYS, PLEASE TAKE A
LOOK AT THOSE BUSINESS ITEMS
FOR THE MONTH OF NOVEMBER.
THERE ARE NO BUSINESS ITEMS
SCHEDULED FOR THE COMMISSION SO
MOVING ON TO INFORMATION AND
DISCUSSION, THE FIRST TOPIC IS
VISION ZERO TIERED METHODOLOGY
UPDATES IN THE CITY'S
TRANSPORTATION PLAN.
CRASH DATA ANALYSIS FOLLOWS A
METHODOLOGY THAT GENERATES
TIERED INTERSECTIONS AND STREET
SEGMENTS TO HIGHLIGHT THE
POTENTIAL NEED FOR MITIGATION
MEASURES.
STAFF IDENTIFIED THE NEED TO
ADJUST THIS METHODOLOGY TO FOR
VARIOUS REASONS AND ACTIONS
FROM FIRST RESPONDERS.
CYNTHIA AND SUSANNE WILL NOW
PRESENT THE WORK PROGRESS AND
ADDRESS ANY QUESTIONS FROM THE
COMMISSION'S SUZANNE.
CYNTHIA, THE FLOOR IS YOURS.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH AND I AM
GOING TO MAKE SURE THAT MY AS
MY AUDIO WORKING OK BECAUSE MY
SCREEN IS QUITE BLURRY THIS
EVENING.
WONDERFUL.
THANK YOU FOR THE COMPANY.
>> I WOULD ALSO LIKE TO CONFIRM
THAT MY AUDIO IS WORKING
BECAUSE IT THROUGH AN ERROR.
>> THANK GOOD.
>> AND THEN CHRIS CAN I GET A
THUMBS UP.
>> YOU CAN SEE THE PRESENTATION
SLIDE BACK.
YEAH UP WONDERFUL.
>> THANK YOU.
OK MAYBE MY MY MOUTH IS NOT
WORKING.
ALL RIGHT.
GOOD EVENING EVERYONE AGAIN MY
NAME IS SUSANNE FLOWERS.
I'M A TRANSPORTATION PROGRAM
MANAGER WITH THE CITY OF ANN
ARBOR AND SECOND AND I'M
CYNTHIA RENNINGER.
I AM ONE OF OUR TRANSPORTATION
ENGINEERS AND WE ARE GOING TO
TALK ABOUT OUR TIERED
METHODOLOGY THIS EVENING AND
MAKE SURE THAT WE HAVE SOME
TIME FOR QUESTIONS SO WE DO
HAVE A BRIEF AGENDA.
THE PURPOSE OF THE TIERED
LOCATIONS FREQUENCY OF UPDATING
,SCORING, REMOVAL OF SEGMENTS
,PEDESTRIAN AND BICYCLE
CRASHES AND SEGMENT LENGTH.
SO I AM CYNTHIA AND I ARE
OBVIOUSLY GOING TO BE DOING A
LITTLE CO PRESENTING AS WE HAVE
DONE IN THE PAST.
AND SO CYNTHIA, WHY IDENTIFY
YOUR LOCATIONS?
WE IDENTIFY KILLER LOCATIONS AS
PART OF OUR TRANSPORTATION
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN IN ORDER TO
UNDERSTAND AREAS THAT ARE
UNDERPERFORM FROM A SAFETY
PERSPECTIVE SO THAT WHEN WE
LOOK AT THIS WE LOOK AT THE
CRASH SEVERITY.
SO HOW SIGNIFICANT THE INJURIES
OF EACH CRASH ARE AND WE ALSO
PLACE A SPECIAL EMPHASIS ON OUR
VULNERABLE ROAD USERS SUCH AS
PEDESTRIANS, CYCLISTS AND WE'LL
GET INTO HOW WE USE THESE HIGH
INJURY.
HE'S IDENTIFIED HIGH INJURY
LOCATIONS SO AS A REMINDER WE
USE OUR TIERED CORRIDORS AT
INTERSECTIONS TO HELP GUIDE
THESE PROGRAM AREAS ACROSS THE
CITY.
FOR EXAMPLE, WITHIN OUR ARBOR
POLICE DEPARTMENT WE HEARD A
PRESENTATION SEVERAL MONTHS GO
ABOUT HOW THEY'RE USING SOME
OF THE THE HIGH INJURY NETWORK
CORRIDORS ARE TIERED CORRIDORS
TO HELP BETTER DEFINE THEIR
TRAFFIC SAFETY AND ENFORCEMENT
PLAN.
ADDITIONALLY, WE USE WITHIN OUR
STREETS TEAM TO ENSURE THAT WE
HAVE MAINTENANCE OPERATION THAT
PRIORITIZE AND CLEAR PATHS FOR
SAFE MOVEMENT OF PEOPLE OF ALL
AGES AND ABILITIES.
WE USE OUR COMMUNICATIONS TEAM
AT THE CITY TO HELP US WITH OUR
MESSAGING AND EDUCATIONAL ITEMS
THROUGH CITY COMMUNICATION
CHANNELS AND THEN WITHIN OUR
ENGINEERING TEAM ON THE FOURTH
FLOOR WE DO USE THESE TWO
RECORDERS TO HELP US PRIORITIZE
AND SCORE WITHIN OUR CAPITAL
IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM OR OUR
CAPITAL PROJECT AS A WE'RE
GOING TO DO A LITTLE BRIEF
METHODOLOGY OVERVIEW OF KIND
OF WHAT GOES INTO WHAT HAS GONE
INTO THAT METHODOLOGY AND HOW
WE ARE GOING TO BE UPDATING
THESE CORRIDORS.
>> WOULD YOU LIKE TO TAKE THIS
SLIDE PLEASE?
SO THIS SLIDE IS OVERVIEW
OF THE METHODOLOGY THAT WE USED
IN THE TRANSPORTATION PLAN.
WE HAVE A GRAPHIC ON THE SLIDE
THAT SHOWS THE TIER ONE AND
TIER TO FOCUS CORRIDORS AS WELL
AS A TIER ONE INTERIOR TO FOCUS
INTERSECTIONS AND THIS MAP IS
IN OUR TRANSPORTATION PLAN AND
THE SLIDE ALSO RULES THAT WE
GATHER FIVE YEARS OF CRASH DATA
IN DETERMINING THESE ORDERS IN
OUR FIRST ROUND WE USE THE MOST
RECENT FIVE YEARS OF CRASH DATA
AND WE HAVE NOT UPDATED IT TO
DATE.
THAT IS THE PROCESS THAT WE'RE
STARTING ON.
WE ASSIGN CRASH LOCATIONS TO
CORRIDORS OR INTERSECTION
LOCATIONS AND YOU CAN THINK
OF THAT AS FOR A STREET FROM
ONE COUNTRY TO ANOTHER CROSS
STREET FOR A CORRIDOR OR AN
INTERSECTION WITHIN THE
INFLUENCE AREA OF THAT
INTERSECTION, THEN WE CALCULATE
THE CRASH SCORE WHICH IS
WEIGHTED AS I SAID EARLIER, WE
LOOK AT THE SEVERITY OF THE
CRASHES, THE SEVERITY OF THE
INJURIES AND WHETHER OR NOT IT
WAS A VULNERABLE ROAD USER AND
ASSIGN GRADUATED WEIGHTING WITH
THE HIGHEST RATING BEING FATAL
CRASHES AND THEN WE SAW THE
CORRIDORS IN THE INTERSECTIONS
INTO THESE TIERS BASED ON THEIR
RELATIVE PERFORMANCE TO THEIR
PEERS IN THE FIRST ROUND THAT
WAS WE FOUND THE MEAN AND THEN
WE LOOKED AT ONE OR TWO
STANDARD DEVIATIONS ABOVE THAT
MEAN SO ONE STANDARD DEVIATION
WAS OUR TIER TWO CORRIDORS AND
TWO STANDARD DEVIATIONS OR TIER
ONE CORRIDORS AND INTERSECTIONS
AND THEN FROM THERE WE WE
SELECTED THOSE FOCUS CORRIDORS
AND THOSE FOCUS INTERSECTIONS.
>> IT MAY SOUND A LITTLE
STRANGE THAT WE HAVE TO SELECT
SOME OF THESE CORRIDORS BUT
THERE IS A VERIFICATION PROCESS
THAT HAPPENS
AND TODAY I'M
GOING TO HAVE YOU CONTINUE ON
THIS VICTORY.
>> YES.
SO THIS SLIDE AS CYNTHIA IS
TAKING A STEP, THIS REALLY
TALKS ABOUT THE METHODOLOGY
LIKE THE KIND OF NUANCE OF HOW
WE ARE JOINING ALL OF THOSE
INTERSECTIONS TOGETHER NOW.
YEAH, SO THERE'S THIS GRAPHIC
SORT OF SHOWS A PROGRESSION
OF OF THE WORK THAT WE DO AND
WE START WITH CREEDY OR
CLEANING INTERSECTION NODE'S
AND THERE WAS A LOT OF WORK
THAT WENT INTO THAT ORIGINAL
MAPPING PROCESS SOME OF THAT
HAS TO DO WITH THE WAY THAT THE
ROAD SEGMENTS ARE BROKEN UP BY
THE STATE FOR ANALYSIS WHEN WE
LOSE SOFTWARE SUCH AS SOFT AND
THAT NOT ALL OF THOSE SEGMENTS
AND NOT ALL OF THOSE
INTERSECTION INTERSECTIONS
COMPLETELY MAKES SENSE.
ONE OF THE PLACES WHERE WE HAVE
A LOT OF WORK TO DO FOR THAT IS
ACTUALLY IN ROUNDABOUTS BECAUSE
THE ROUNDABOUTS TEND TO SHOW UP
IN IN THE THE STATE FRAMEWORK
AS BEING LOTS OF DISCRETE
SEGMENTS WHEN IT'S REALLY THE
WHOLE ROUNDABOUT IS OPERATING
AS A SINGLE INTERSECTION.
SO AFTER THAT CLEAN UP HAPPENED
WE ASSIGN CRASHES TO THOSE
INTERSECTIONS THEN WE'RE
SCORING BASED ON THE CRASHES AS
WE DISCUSSED PREVIOUSLY AND
THEN DEFINING AND IDENTIFYING
THOSE FOCUS INTERSECTIONS AND
THEN WE GET OUR FINAL RESULT
FOR OUR INTERSECTIONS.
MOST OF THE CLEANING UP WORK ON
THE INTERSECTIONS REALLY
HAPPENS AT THE BEGINNING IN
MAKING SURE THAT WE HAVE THAT
THAT INTERSECTION INFLUENCE
AREA SET.
>> OUR NEXT SLIDE LOOKS AT THE
OVERVIEW OF OUR FOCUS
CORRIDORS.
THIS IS A SIMILAR GRAPHIC
SHOWING THE PROCESS AND IT
READS THAT WE CLEAN AND CREATE
SEGMENTS SO THAT'S MAKING SURE
THAT WE HAVE SEGMENTS THAT ARE
CONSISTENT FROM A DESIGN
PERSPECTIVE AND LAND
PERSPECTIVE THEN THE CRASHES
ARE ASSIGNED TO THOSE STREETS
AND AS OUR THIS IN BOTH CASES
ASSIGNING THE CRASHES IT'S ALL
DONE IN GE'EZ.
WE ALREADY HAVE OUR CRASHES.
YOUR REFERENCE FROM FROM THE
STATE CERTIFIED DATA SET THEN
THE NEXT STEP IS SCORING THE
CORRIDORS BASED ON THOSE
CRASHES AS THE SAME CRITERIA AS
WE DISCUSSED PREVIOUSLY AND
THEN DEFINING AND IF I
IDENTIFYING WHAT OUR FOCUS
CORRIDORS ARE.
SO THAT'S LOOKING AT THE
ANALYSIS AND THEN WE HAVE OUR
FINAL RESULT.
THERE IS A SECOND LAYER THAT
HAPPENS.
>> SO THIS THIS NEXT SLIDE IS
OUR VULNERABLE ROAD USERS FOR
PEDESTRIANS AND CYCLISTS WHEN
WE GO THROUGH THE FIRST PATH
OF DEFINING WHAT OUR TIER ONE
IN TIER TWO CORRIDORS AND
INTERSECTIONS ARE THAT'S JUST
BASED ON THE CRASH SEVERITY WE
DO A SECOND HAS I HAVE
DESCRIBED THIS TO SOME OF MY
COLLEAGUES AS THINKING OF US AS
AN OVERLAY SO IT'S SOMETHING
SITS ON TOP OF THAT INITIAL
ANALYSIS AND FURTHER INFORMS
THAT INITIAL ANALYSIS AND THIS
IS WHERE WE GO BACK AND WE LOOK
AT OUR PEDESTRIANS AND CYCLISTS
AND GO THROUGH THAT SAME
PROCESS.
SO THIS GRAPHIC JUST SHOWS THE
THE ANALYZING SO ARTIST TEAM
THEN RUNS THE SAME ANALYSIS
JUST WITH THE VULNERABLE ROAD
USER CRASHES WE ARE ABLE TO
REFINE WHAT IS A TIER ONE AND
TIER TWO CORRIDOR OR
INTERSECTION BASED ON
PERFORMANCE RELATIVE TO THE
GROUP OF PEERS AND THEN WE
VERIFY THOSE RESULTS BY THE
TRANSPORTATION TEAM LOOKS AT
THE RESULTS AT AND MAKES SURE
THAT IT'S CONSISTENT WITH OUR
WE'RE SEEING THE HOTSPOTS AND
CRASHES AND THAT EVERYTHING
SEEMS TO BE HAVING A CONSISTENT
RESULT THAT MAKES SENSE BOTH
MATHEMATICALLY AND JUST SORT
OF LOOKING AT IT AND MAKING
SURE THAT THE CRASH PATTERNS
ARE CONSISTENT WITH WHERE WE'RE
SEEING HOTSPOTS.
ONE OF THE THINGS THAT WE
REALLY WANTED TO ENSURE THAT WE
FORMALIZED AND MADE MORE CLEAR
WITH EVERYONE IS THE FREQUENT
THAT WE WILL BE DOING THE
SAFETY ANALYSIS THAT WILL
COINCIDE WITH THE DEVELOPMENT
OF THE CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT
PROGRAM OR IP AND THAT WILL BE
DONE EVERY TWO YEARS.
SO ONCE THIS ANALYSIS IS RUN WE
WOULD NOT BE UPDATING THAT
AGAIN AND THAT WOULD ALSO
REFLECT OBVIOUSLY A FEW MORE
YEARS OF THAT FIVE YEAR ROLLING
AVERAGE DATA CRASHES AND
CYNTHIA HAD NOTED THAT THE DID
YOU WANT TO SAY SOMETHING ABOUT
THE UPDATING?
>> I DID.
I JUST WANTED TO EMPHASIZE THAT
WE WE DID TAKE THAT TWO YEAR
CYCLE SO THAT IT IT DOES
COINCIDE WITH OUR CAPITAL
IMPROVEMENT PLAN AND PROGRAM
UPDATE THE SAFETY ELEMENTS HAVE
REALLY BEEN INTEGRATED INTO
THAT CAPITAL PLANNING PROCESS.
WE WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT WE
HAVE UP TO DATE INFORMATION AS
WE'RE GOING THROUGH THAT
PROCESS IN THE FUTURE AND WE
DID WANT TO SPEND A MOMENT OR
TWO COMPARING WHAT OUR ORIGINAL
SCORING EMPHASIS WAS THAT
WEIGHTING THAT THEY HAD
DISCUSSED THAT REALLY INFORMS
THIS METHODOLOGY.
SO THE GRAPHIC ON THE LEFT
SHOWS OUR TWENTY TWENTY ONE
FOCUS AND FRESH SCORING SO WE
HAVE FATALITIES AT FIFTY
SERIOUS INJURY CRASHES AT FORTY
B LEVEL INJURIES THAT CAN SEE
LEVEL INJURY CRASHES AT WAITED
ONE AND THEN OUR PROPERTY
DAMAGE CRASHES AT POINT FIVE
AND THOSE REALLY DO REFLECT ALL
OF THE DIFFERENT TYPES THAT WE
RECEIVE WITHIN THE THE
CATEGORIZATION IN TACT FOR
CYNTHIA, DID YOU WANT TO ADD
ANYTHING ON THE ORIGINAL CRASH
WAITING BEFORE I SHOWED IT
BEFORE WE DISCUSSED THE UPDATE
?
>> NO.
AWESOME.
SO YOU'RE GOING TO SEE SOME
VERY SIMILAR NUMBERS FOR WHAT
WE'RE PROPOSING FOR MOVING
FORWARD.
SO WE ARE NOW LOOKING AGAIN
HAVING OUR FATAL INJURY CRASH
IS STILL WEIGHTED AT 50 BUT
INCORPORATING INFORMATION THAT
WE HAVE BEEN LEARNING FROM APD
ABOUT OUR SOME OF THE MORE
SERIOUS CRASH INVESTIGATED
SERIOUS INJURIES THAT AP
PERFORMS CRASH INVESTIGATIONS
THAT SEEMED LIKE A VERY
CONVOLUTED WAY OF SAYING THESE
ARE EXTREMELY SERIOUS INJURY
CRASHES AND THERE IS A LOT
OF DIFFERENCE THAT CAN BE FOUND
IN SOME OF THOSE HIGH LEVEL
INJURIES.
AND WE HAVE NOTED AGAIN
LIEUTENANT SCHERBA HAD PROVIDED
A PRESENTATION ON THIS A COUPLE
OF MONTHS AGO AND WE SAW WHERE
THOSE MPHASIS CORRIDORS WERE
ALONG KIND OF JACKSON PACARD
AND WASHTENAW AREA.
SO WE REALLY DID WANT TO TARGET
SOME OF THOSE MORE SEVERE
INJURY CRASHES AND WE'RE
PROPOSING THAT AS ONE AREA FOR
CHANGE.
ADDITIONALLY, WE'RE LOOKING AT
HAVING OUR SERIOUS THE
REMAINING SERIOUS INJURY
CRASHES AT A RATE OF THIRTY AND
THEN SIMILARLY OUR B LEVEL
INJURY CRASHES WOULD BE RATED
TEN C LEVEL INJURY CRASHES ONE
IN PROPERTY DAMAGE ONLY AT
POINT FIVE.
LET ME PAUSE FOR A MOMENT AND
SEE IF CYNTHIA HAS ANYTHING
THAT YOU'D LIKE TO ADD.
>> I THINK THIS IS A GREAT TIME
TO SEE IF ANY OF THE
COMMISSIONERS HAVE QUESTIONS OR
CONCERNS.
I JUST WANT TO REMIND YOU THIS
IS AWAITING SO THESE SCORES ARE
YOU SCORE ARE YOU MULTIPLY THIS
DIFFERENT WAITING OUT BY THE
NUMBER OF INSTANCES AND THEN
YOU END UP WITH THE OVERALL
SCORE FOR THE CORRIDOR.
SO AS SUZANNE WAS SAYING, WE
REALLY WANT TO EMPHASIZE THE
MOST SEVERE INJURIES AND THE
DATA THAT WE GET IN THE
CERTIFIED DATA SET HAS ALL
OF THE FATAL INJURY CRASHES
IDENTIFIED AND ALL OF THE
SERIOUS INJURY CRASHES
IDENTIFIED.
THIS PROCESS WILL REQUIRE SOME
MANUAL, SOME MANUAL WEIGHTING
OF THE CALL-OUT CRASHES THAT
ARE EIGHT LEVEL INJURIES BUT
THEY ARE THOSE MOST SEVERE
INJURIES THAT COULD HAVE BEEN A
FATALITY AND THEN THE REST
OF THE SERIOUS INJURY CRASHES
GIVEN THE REALLY BROAD TYPES
OF INJURIES THOSE COULD BE WILL
THEN BE WEIGHTED A LITTLE BIT
CLOSER TO THOSE B LEVEL
INJURIES.
SO THEY WILL HAVE A LITTLE BIT
MORE OF A MORE SIMILAR
WEIGHTING AND END RESULT AND
THEN THE SEA LEVEL AND THE
PROPERTY DAMAGE ONLY WILL
REALLY BE THE THE LESS
CONCERNING FOR THE WEIGHTING
PROCESS.
>> DOES ANYONE HAVE ANY
QUESTIONS AT THIS POINT?
I LIKE THE PROPOSED CHANGES.
WOULD YOU MIND GOING THROUGH
THE KIND OF A QUICK DEFINITION
THE ABC JUST FOR THE BENEFIT
OF OUR OUR NEW MEMBERS THE
TYPES OF CRASHES ABC YEAH.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU CHAIRMAN.
THAT IS A VERY GOOD REMINDER.
SO THE WAY THE STATE
OF MICHIGAN CATEGORIZES INJURY
LEVELS IN CRASHES IS NO NO
INJURY WOULD BE A PROPERTY
DAMAGE ONLY CRASH FREQUENTLY.
>> THIS IS A CAR AND CAR SIDE.
>> WHY OR MAYBE A REAR END
WHERE THERE IS NOT A LOT
OF KINEMATIC ENERGY AND NOBODY
GETS INJURED IN THOSE CRASHES.
>> A SEA LEVEL CRASH IS A VERY
MINOR CRASH SO YOU MIGHT HAVE A
LITTLE BIT OF A CONTUSION OR
MAYBE AN ABRASION BUT IT WOULD
STOP SHORT OF A LACERATION.
SO AN ABRASION BEING THE SKIN
IS RUBBED LIKE A RUBBER.
A LACERATION WOULD BE AN ACTUAL
CUT YOU GET YOU MOVE FROM B
LEVEL INJURIES WHICH ARE
CONSIDERED TO BE PROBABLE BUT
NOT INCAPACITATING INJURIES
UP
TO AN ELBOW INJURY WHICH IS
CONSIDERED TO BE AN
INCAPACITATING INJURY.
>> SO THESE INJURIES WOULD BE
THERE'S A REALLY WIDE RANGE
HERE SO IT COULD BE SIGNIFICANT
LACERATION.
SO A SIGNIFICANT CUT WAS
SIGNIFICANT BLEEDING THAT GOES
THROUGH A COUPLE OF LAYERS,
MAYBE TWO OR THREE LAYERS
OF SKIN.
YOU COULD HAVE A BROKEN BONE
BUT THAT COULD BE EVERYTHING
FROM A VERY MINOR BREAK AS
SOMEONE FELL THEY PUT THEIR
HAND OUT.
>> THEY BROKE THEIR WRIST ALL
THE WAY UP TO A COMPOUND
FRACTURE AND A LEVEL INJURIES
PRETTY MUCH GO ALL THE WAY UP
TO THOSE REALLY SIGNIFICANT
INJURIES THAT COULD REQUIRE
LONG HOSPITAL STAYS AND HAVE
PERMANENT IMPACTFUL DAMAGE TO A
HUMAN SUCH AS A TRAUMATIC BRAIN
INJURY OR PARALYSIS BUT FALLS
SHORT OF AN INDIVIDUAL
PERISHING AS THE RESULT OF THE
CRASH.
>> ONE THING THAT IS REALLY
SIGNIFICANT TO NOTE HERE IS
THAT THERE IS A DIFFERENCE IN
THE WAY THE CRASHES ARE
REPORTED AND WHAT MAY BE THE
FINAL OUTCOME OF A CRASH WAS 30
DAYS HAS PASSED THAT THE TIME
THAT THAT THAT INJURY WINDOW
CLOSES AND IF SOMEONE SHOULD
HAPPEN TO PASS AWAY AS A RESULT
OF INJURIES PAST THOSE 30 DAYS,
THAT CRASH WOULD STILL SHOW AS
A LEVEL CRASH.
>> SO AND WHEN OUR FOR THE
COMMISSIONERS WHO WEREN'T HERE
FOR THE LAST PRESENTATION THAT
SUZANNE AND I GAVE ON WITH
ABOUT ABOUT THE CRASH DATA, THE
THE POLICE DEPARTMENT SENDS THE
OFFICER OUT IN RESPONSE TO A
CRASH IF THE OFFICER IS
CONCERNED THAT THERE WILL BE
LOSS OF LIFE AND WANTS TO
ENSURE THAT THERE IS A HIGHER
LEVEL OF INVESTIGATION, THAT'S
ONE THEY HAVE A CALL OUT FOR A
FULL CRASH RECONSTRUCTION AND
IT'S THOSE A LEVEL INJURY
CRASHES THAT WE WANT TO COUNT
AT THE SAME LEVEL AS FATALITIES
.
THANKS VERY MUCH FOR THAT
REFRESHER.
THESE CATEGORIZATIONS COME UP A
LOT IN OUR WORK SO IT'S USEFUL
BUT ERICA, THANKS.
AND THIS MAKES SENSE FROM A
PRACTICAL STANDPOINT OF JUST
TRYING TO HOW WE'RE THINKING
ABOUT OUR TIER ONE AND TIER TWO
CORRIDORS AND ALL OF THAT.
I'M JUST CURIOUS A LITTLE BIT
MORE FROM THE YOU KNOW, IN
TERMS OF CHANGING THE SCORING
CRITERIA ARE ABILITY TO BE SORT
OF CONSISTENT OVER TIME.
IS THERE ANY CONCERNS AROUND
THAT AND THEN I GUESS THIS IS
MORE IN TERMS OF JUST
IDENTIFYING OUR TIER ONE, OUR
DIFFERENT YEARS OF CORRIDORS
BUT I GUESS IMPLICATIONS FOR
OBVIOUSLY VISION ZERO IS ABOUT
PREVENTING THOSE SERIOUS AND
AND FATAL CRASHES.
SO JUST, YOU KNOW, CURIOUS HOW
THAT PLAYS OUT TOWARDS OUR
GOALS.
MAYBE MAYBE I'M ANSWERING MY
LAST QUESTION MYSELF BECAUSE
IT'S A TIER ISSUE BUT MORE
CONSISTENCY PERHAPS THIS IS MY
QUESTION.
WE HAD A LOT OF DISCUSSION
ABOUT THAT QUESTION WITHIN OUR
OWN TEAM AND WITH OUR PARTNERS
WITHIN THE CITY WHO ARE NOT
INTERNAL TO OUR TEAM LIKE OUR
GISTER DEPARTMENT AND THERE WAS
A LOT OF DISCUSSION ON IS IT
IMPORTANT TO BE CONSISTENT FROM
ANALYSIS TO ANALYSIS CYCLE AND
WE DO WANT TO CREATE A
METHODOLOGY THAT WILL BE REALLY
CONSISTENT MOVING FORWARD.
>> BUT WE FELT LIKE THROUGH OUR
PARTNERSHIP WITH THE POLICE
DEPARTMENT AND REALLY STARTING
TO DIG INTO SOME OF OUR FIELD
LEVEL CRASHES AND LOOKING AT
EVERY SINGLE ONE OF THOSE
CRASHES IN A WAY WITH A
MULTIDISCIPLINARY TEAM OVER THE
LAST FIVE YEARS WORTH
OF CRASHES AND UNDERSTANDING
THEM AT A DEEPER LEVEL, WE
WANTED TO BE ABLE TO REALLY
EMPHASIZE THOSE CRASH ISSUES
THAT ARE FATAL AND ALMOST COULD
HAVE BEEN FATAL.
THE ONES THAT WERE ARE REALLY
VERY CLOSE AND THOSE ARE THE
REALLY THOSE ONES ARE THE ONES
THAT WE'RE REALLY, REALLY
FOCUSING ON AND REALLY SORT
OF UNDERSTANDING WHAT THAT THAT
WIDE VARIATION OF A LEVEL
INJURIES IS AND HOW DO WE
REALLY EMPHASIZE THOSE INJURY
CRASHES THAT ARE THE HIGHEST
INJURY CRASHES.
>> THE OTHER THING THAT IS
IMPORTANT TO CONSIDER IS THAT
THERE WILL ALWAYS BE TIER ONE
AND HERE TWO CRASH LOCATIONS NO
MATTER HOW WELL THE SYSTEM IS
DOING BECAUSE THIS METHODOLOGY
IS PERFORMANCE RELATIVE TO
PEERS.
IT'S NOT PERFORMANCE RELATIVE
TO AN ABSOLUTE SO EVEN WHEN WE
ACHIEVE VISION ZERO AND WE
DON'T HAVE ANY MORE FATALITIES,
WE WILL STILL HAVE TIER ONE AND
TIER TWO CORRIDORS AND
INTERSECTIONS BECAUSE IT WILL
BE A LOOK AT HOW THE SYSTEM IS
PERFORMING RELATIVE TO ITS
PEERS WITHIN THE CITY AND SO
THAT IT WILL ALWAYS BE IT WILL
NEVER BE EXACTLY CONSISTENT
FROM GENERATION TO GENERATION
BECAUSE THE CRASHES ARE
CHANGING AND THE CRASH TYPES
WILL PROBABLY BE CHANGING A
LITTLE BIT BASED ON THE
SYSTEMIC ENGINEERING
APPLICATION THAT WE'RE DOING
AND OTHER AREAS OF WORK THAT WE
AS ENTIRE DIVISIONS YOUR TEAM
IS DOING SO IT WILL CHANGE BUT
IT WILL ALWAYS BE THERE.
DOES THAT ANSWER YOUR QUESTION
?
IT DOES.
THANK YOU.
SO ARE LIKE THE MAYBE YOU'RE
GETTING TO THIS LATER BUT ARE
LIKE THE TOP 10 PERCENT POINTS
INTERSECTIONS DEFINED AS TIER
ONE AND THEN THE NEXT THIRTY
PERCENT OR TIER TWO YEARS OR
SOME OTHER WAY OF DEFINING IS
RELATIVE TO THEIR PEERS IN THE
CITY.
OUR OUR FIRST PASS WILL BE TO
LOOK AT THE MEAN AND STANDARD
DEVIATIONS ABOVE.
SO IF IT'S ONE STANDARD
DEVIATION ABOVE THE MEAN THEN
THAT IS TIER ONE.
IF IT'S TO STANDARD DEVIATIONS
ABOVE THE MEAN THEN IT WOULD BE
ONE STANDARD DEVIATION IS TIER
TWO TIER STANDARD DEVIATION IF
THERE IS A TIER ONE SIDE
FURTHER AWAY YOU ARE FROM THE
MEAN THE HIGHER THE FOCUS'S OK
THANK YOU
.
OK WELL ON TO THE NEXT SLIDE.
THANK YOU FOR THOSE QUESTIONS.
>> ONE OF THE THINGS THAT AGAIN
OUR TEAM SPENT A FAIR AMOUNT
OF TIME REVIEWING OR THE WHAT I
LIKE TO CALL THE ORIGINAL
SEGMENT WITHIN WE DO HAVE THE
GRAPHIC FROM THE PLAN THAT
SHOWCASES OUR TIER ONE AND HERE
TWO SEGMENTS AND TWO OF THE
SEGMENTS THAT WE WANT TO CALL
OUT THAT WE SAW AS PROBLEMATIC
WHEN WE STARTED THIS EVALUATION
WORK WAS HERE ON PARKWAY.
OH RIGHT.
NOW I'M DRAWING OF AN IMAGINARY
LINE FROM HERE ON PARKWAY TO
SHOW THE ENTIRETY OF THE
SEGMENT BY WHICH IT WAS SCORED.
SO WE HAVE THIS SEGMENT
STARTING OFF VERY FAR NORTH
PLYMOUTH ROAD.
OH NO SORRY.
AND THEN AGAIN CROSSING
PLYMOUTH ROAD ALL THROUGH
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN PROPERTY
COMING DOWN FURTHER SOUTH UNTIL
IT ENDS AT WASHINGTON AVENUE.
AND AS CYNTHIA HAD NOTED BEFORE
THAT SEGMENTATION MAY NOT MAKE
THE MOST SENSE BECAUSE IT
TRANSCENDS A LOT OF DIFFERENT
LAND USE CONTEXTS.
SPEED CHANGES AND SO WE REALLY
WANTED TO EVALUATE THAT IN A
MUCH DIFFERENT WAY.
AND AGAIN, ANOTHER EXAMPLE THAT
WE LOOKED AT WAS LIBERTY ROW.
SO WE RIGHT NOW THE CURRENT
SEGMENT LENGTH IS FROM THE CITY
LIMITS ALL THE WAY TO DOWNTOWN
ANN ARBOR AND I THINK MANY
OF US KNOW THAT THAT LAND USE
CONTEXT DOES CHANGE THE CLOSER
THAT WE GET TO THE DOWNTOWN
AREA, THE AREA IN BETWEEN THE
CITY LIMITS AND KIND OF THAT
RING ROAD OF I-95 OR SO WITHIN
THIS NEW EVALUATION WE REALLY
WANTED TO TAKE LAND USE CONTEXT
INTO MUCH MORE CONSIDERATION.
WE WANTED TO LOOK AT THE
ROADWAY CHARACTERISTICS AND
ALSO THINK ABOUT THE REALITY
OF BEING ABLE TO DEVELOP A
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROJECT AND
TRYING TO DO SOMETHING THAT IS
MULTIPLE MILES LONG IS NOT
USUALLY HOW MANY CAPITAL
PROJECTS ARE DONE SO WE REALLY
DID TAKE A FAIR AMOUNT OF TIME
WITH OUR OWN STAFF AND WITH OUR
GUYS PROFESSIONALS TO RE
SEGMENT THOSE LENGTHS INTO
SOMETHING MORE MEANINGFUL AND
PRACTICAL TO THE SEGMENTS.
AND CYNTHIA, PLEASE JUMP IN
WHENEVER YOU FEEL YOU NEED TO
AS WELL TO THE SEGMENTS THAT WE
WILL BE REMOVING FROM THIS
UPDATED CRITERIA WILL BE E
MEDICAL CENTER DRIVE AND MORE
STRAIGHT.
THESE WERE SHORT SEGMENT
SEGMENT LENGTH AND THE REASON
WHY THESE PARTICULAR CORRIDORS
ARE POPPING UP AS IMPORTANT IS
BECAUSE OF THE CRASHES
.
THOSE CRASHES ARE MUCH MORE
ATTRIBUTED TO THE INTERSECTION
SO WE DIDN'T WANT THOSE TO KIND
OF GET DOUBLE COUNTED BUT WE
DID AN IN-DEPTH LOOK AT THIS
AND VERIFIED THE THE CRASHES
THAT WERE BEING ASSIGNED TO
BOTH OF THESE CORRIDORS WERE
REALLY THE INTERSECTION CRASHES
AND ON MORE IT MORE IS ONE WAY
NORTH OUT AND THERE WEREN'T ANY
SEGMENT CRASHES THAT THAT EVEN
HAPPENED NORTH OF THE
INTERSECTION.
>> SO THEY WERE IT WAS
DEFINITELY A FUNCTION OF JUST
THE BOUNDARY THAT WAS PLACED ON
THE SEGMENT AS AS WE WERE DOING
AND I I GUESS THE ONLY THING I
WOULD ADD HERE IS THAT WE ALSO
LOOKED AT THE THE DESIGN
CONTEXT OF THE UNDERSIDE OF THE
CORRIDOR AS WE WERE DOING THIS
AND REALLY WANTED TO IN
ADDITION TO TO LANDY'S
UNDERSTAND HOW DIFFERENT
DESIGNS WERE PERFORMING
RELATIVE TO EACH OTHER.
>> SO STADIUM IS A GOOD EXAMPLE
OF THIS IN ADDITION TO THE TWO
CORRIDORS THAT SUZANNE HAD
DISCUSSED WHERE THE DESIGN IS
IS SIGNIFICANTLY CHANGING WHERE
WE HAVE AND SOME PLACES WE HAVE
FOUR LANE CROSS SECTION,
SOMEPLACE WE HAVE FIVE LANE
CROSS SECTION, SOME PLACES WE
HAVE A THREE CROSS SECTION AND
BEING ABLE TO SEE HOW THEY'RE
PERFORMING AGAINST EACH OTHER
AS WELL.
>> ALL RIGHT.
SO WHAT DOES IT MEAN?
OH YES.
ABOUT YEAH I'M SORRY TO
INTERRUPT BUT ON THE EAST
MEDICAL CENTER DRIVE I
CERTAINLY GET YOUR POINT THAT
THE THE CRASHES THAT YOU'VE
ANALYZED TO DATE ARE FOCUSED IN
ON THEIR INTERSECTION BASED I
JUST WHEN YOU TALK ABOUT
REMOVING THE SEGMENT THIS IS
THE EAST MEDICAL CENTER DRIVE
ONE IS ONE THAT WE'RE WIDENING
THE ROAD THERE AND SO NOT
KNOWING WHAT IMPACT THAT'S
GOING TO HAVE PARTICULARLY WITH
RELATIONSHIPS LIKE MAYBE WEST
MEDICAL CENTER DRIVE, I'M JUST
CURIOUS ABOUT THE YOU KNOW, THE
DECISION TO REMOVE THAT SEGMENT
NOW OR WILL IT JUST YOU KNOW,
JUST THOUGHTS AROUND THAT
AND
SEPTEMBER FORGIVE ME IF I JUMP
IN AND YOU KNOW, I DON'T THINK
THAT DOESN'T PRECLUDE THIS
INTERSECTION FROM BEING A FOCUS
INTERSECTION AT ALL BECAUSE
THAT HISTO BERKELEY HAS BEEN
WHERE CRASHES HAVE BEEN
LOCATED.
BUT IF THAT IS INACCURATE,
PLEASE DO SO A LITTLE BIT
OF EXTRA CONTEXT AS WELL.
THE WE'RE LOOKING AT CRASHES
OVER THE LENGTH OF A SEGMENT
AND SO THE SEGMENT IS VERY,
VERY SHORT AND BOTH OF THESE
INSTANCES BECAUSE THAT BLOCK TO
THE NEXT INTERSECTION IS NOT
VERY LONG STORY AND WHEN YOU
LOOK AT CRASHES THERE ARE CRASH
TYPES THAT ARE MORE ASSOCIATED
WITH THE SEGMENT AND THERE ARE
STATES THAT ARE MORE ASSOCIATED
WITH INTERSECTIONS.
SO THE SEGMENT HAS NOT BETTER
THROWN AWAY.
IT'S WHAT WE RAN IT IT SHOWED
UP AS BEING A TIER LOCATION AND
THE TEAM SAID WELL THIS LOOKS A
LITTLE INTERESTING AND THE SAME
PROCESS HAPPENED IN THE
ORIGINAL TRANSPORTATION PLAN
WHERE THE TEAM SAID THIS LOOKS
A LITTLE INTERESTING, DUG INTO
IT A LITTLE DEEPER AND REALIZED
THAT THEY WERE NOT CRASHES THAT
WERE HAPPENING AS A RESULT
OF CORRIDOR DYNAMICS BUT IT WAS
REALLY JUST BEING IN THE
INFLUENCE OF THAT INTERSECTION
.
>> SO ALL OF THOSE CRASHES ARE
ALREADY ASSIGNED TO THE
INTERSECTION AND ARE ALSO
ANALYZED IN THAT INTERSECTION
ANALYSIS.
SO THIS IS WHERE THERE'S WHEN
YOU LOOK AT THE INTERSECTIONS
AND YOU LOOK AT THE CORRIDORS
IF YOUR CRASH IS IN AN
INTERSECTION BUT IT'S PART OF A
CORRIDOR, IT'S STILL GETS
EVALUATED FOR WAITING IN THE
CORRIDOR AND IN THIS CASE ALL
OF THESE CRASHES WERE REALLY
ASSOCIATED WITH THE CORRIDOR
AND NOT WITH THE DYNAMICS
WITHIN LIKE ALONG THE CORRIDOR
IF THAT MAKES SENSE THAT THE XP
I GUESS THAT I MISSED THE PART
THE INTERSECTION GOING OR
INTERSECTION ANALYSIS.
I GUESS I'M HAVING TROUBLE
FOLLOWING THAT.
THE WEIGHTING IS THE SAME FOR
CRASHES WHETHER THEY'RE
ASSOCIATED WITH WITH
INTERSECTIONS OR WHETHER WE'RE
JUST LOOKING AT WHAT'S IN THAT
SPHERE OR THE INTERSECTION OR
IF WE'RE LOOKING AT A WHOLE
CORRIDOR.
>> THE WAITING IS THE SAME FOR
BOTH ANALYZES.
OK, SO WHEN BUT WHEN WE LOOK AT
A HURON PARKWAY FOR EXAMPLE,
THE CRASHES HAPPEN AT
INTERSECTIONS ON HURON PARKWAY
INCLUDED IN THE ANALYSIS
OF THOSE THOSE SEGMENTS OF YOUR
OWN PARKWAY OR ARE THEY ONLY
ASSIGNED TO INTERSECTIONS NOW
IF IT'S WITHIN THE SCOPE
OF THAT CORRIDOR IT GETS
ANALYZED AS PART OF THE
CORRIDOR WAITING THAT CORRIDOR
HAS INTERSECTIONS AT EITHER END
IF WE'RE LOOKING AT THE
INTERSECTION THEN EVERYTHING
THAT'S WITHIN THE SPHERE
OF THAT INTERSECTION REGARDLESS
OF WHICH CORRIDOR IS COMING
INTO THAT INTERSECTION IS ALSO
ACCOUNTED FOR THAT INTERSECTION
SO CRASHES DO NOT GET ASSIGNED
TO JUST A CORRIDOR OR JUST AN
INTERSECTION.
BUT WHEN YOU LOOK AT THE
GEOSPATIAL ASPECT OF EITHER
OF THOSE WHATEVER IS WITHIN
THAT SORT OF AREA, WHETHER IT'S
A CIRCLE AREA FOR AN
INTERSECTION OR A MORE LINEAR
AREA FOR A CORRIDOR THAT'S GETS
WEIGHTED AND SCORED AS PART
OF EITHER OF THOSE
.
>> OK, THANK YOU ERIC.
>> YEAH, I WAS CURIOUS DO WE
SCORE CRASHES THAT OCCUR ON
UNIVERSITY PROPERTY LIKE THE
SEGMENT OF EASEMENT OR MEDICAL
CENTER DRIVE INTERSECTS WITH
WEST MEDICAL CENTER DRIVE
THAT'S JUST SOUTH THAT BLUE CUT
OFF OR IS THAT NOT INCLUDED IN
OUR SCORING?
WE DO NOT INCLUDE CRASHES THAT
ARE ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
>> SO ONCE IT'S ON UNIVERSITY
OF MICHIGAN'S JURISDICTION THEN
WE'RE NOT ANALYZING IT BECAUSE
WE REALLY DON'T HAVE INFLUENCE
OVER THAT AREA NOW WE DO.
I'M JUST ANTICIPATING THE NEXT
QUESTION CRASHES THAT ARE ON
MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT
OF TRANSPORTATION IT'S
JURISDICTION SO ALONG SHARON
WASHINGTON YOU'RE ON JACKSON OR
NORTH MAINE WE DO SCORE THOSE
LOCATIONS BECAUSE THOSE ARE
AREAS THAT WE DO HAVE SOME
INFLUENCE OVER OF EITHER AS OUR
APPROACHES, THEIR INTERSECTIONS
OR WHEN WE'RE LOOKING AT THINGS
LIKE CROSS OR SIDEWALKS AND
THOSE SORTS OF ITEMS.
YEAH, THANKS.
>> NOT NOT REAL QUESTION.
IT'S MORE OF I GOT TO SEE IF IT
SEEMS LIKE THERE ARE SOME I
GUESS QUESTION OR COMMENTS
ABOUT INTERSECTIONS SEGMENTS IF
WE CAN TOUCH OUT A LITTLE BIT
AS SOME OF THESE DIFFERENT
CARED WHETHER IT'S INTERSECTION
IN SEGMENTS, HOW THEY ARE USED
IN TERMS OF MITIGATION MEASURES
THAT MAY HELP I GUESS CLARIFY
THE THE OVERLAPPING AND THE
DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE TWO
GROUPS.
SO CYNTHIA, SORRY THIS IS MORE
OF A PROBLEM THE IF YOU WANT TO
DOVE INTO THAT AND SO THEN WE
MAY GET TO THAT.
OH OK.
YEAH I THINK THAT'S IN OUR
SLIDE DECK.
OK, ALL RIGHT.
>> SO IF WE DON'T ADDRESS THAT
LET'S MAKE SURE THAT WE WE HOLD
ON TO THAT.
>> SO WHAT A WONDERFUL SEGWAY.
THANK LOOP.
HOW WHAT DOES IT MEAN TO BE A
TIER ONE OR TIER TWO AND HOW DO
WE USE THIS METHODOLOGY THAT
THIS IS A SCREEN NOT A TRUE
SCREENGRAB BUT WITHIN OUR
TRANSPORTATION MASTER PLAN WE
DO HAVE SPECIFIC STRATEGIES AND
TOOLS THAT WE CAN USE TO
ADDRESS SAFETY COUNTERMEASURES
FOR TIER ONE, FOR EXAMPLE,
WE'RE SUPPOSED TO BE ACTIVELY
DEVELOPING PLANS AND ALL OF OUR
CORRIDORS AND INTERSECTIONS
AFTER TWO YEARS OF THE
ADOPTION.
AND I THINK THAT IF YOU WERE TO
LOOK AT OUR ANNUAL SNAPSHOT
WHICH DEMONSTRATES ALL OF MANY
OF THE ENGINEERING EDUCATION
ENCOURAGEMENT EFFORTS TO DATE,
YOU CAN SEE WHERE A LOT OF THAT
APPLICATION HAS ALREADY BEEN
DONE THROUGH ENGINEERING
EFFORTS THROUGH OUR CAPITAL
IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM WHICH I
BELIEVE I WILL HAVE A SCREEN
GRAB OF IN A MOMENT.
AND AGAIN WITHIN OUR TIER TWO
CATEGORY AND CORRIDORS WE ALSO
HAVE WE WANT TO BE IMPLEMENTING
PLANS AND IDENTIFYING WHAT
THOSE STRATEGIES ARE APPLYING
THE METHODOLOGY.
SO WHAT WE HAVE ON THE LEFT IS
A SCREEN GRAB OF OUR CURRENT
TIER ONE AND TIER TWO CORRIDORS
AND INTERSECTIONS ARE YOU CAN
SEE THAT OUR TIER ONE FOCUS
CORRIDORS ARE IN RED MILLER
ROAD, MAIN STREET
, STATE STREET
AND PLYMOUTH ARE A COUPLE
OF EXAMPLES OF THOSE I BELIEVE
MANY OF US MAY KNOW THAT THERE
IS A FAIRLY SIGNIFICANT CAPITAL
PROJECT COMING UP FOR MILLER
ROAD SO THAT WOULD DEFINITELY
BE ADDRESSING SAFETY
COUNTERMEASURES THAT WE'RE
LOOKING TO GET ON THE GROUND
AND GET DEPLOYED TO ADDRESS
THESE SAFETY ISSUES.
WE HAVE SEEN INCREMENTAL
CHANGES OVER THE LAST SEVERAL
YEARS FOR MAIN STREET AND
THERE'S BEEN CONSISTENT
OBVIOUSLY CONSTRUCTION FOR LONG
SEGMENTS OF THE STATE STREET
CORRIDOR AND WITHIN THAT MAP WE
CAN ALSO SEE SOME OF THOSE TIER
ONE AND TIER TWO FOCUS
INTERSECTIONS AND AGAIN BY
USING OUR ANNUAL SNAPSHOT WHICH
IS A IMAGE ON THE RIGHT HAND
SIDE FROM TWENTY TWENTY TWO
WE'VE BEEN DOING THAT FOR TWO
YEARS NOW.
TWENTY TWO AND TWENTY THREE YOU
CAN SEE WHERE SOME OF THESE
FOCUS CORRIDORS AND EMPHASIS
ARE AND WHERE YOU HAVE DENHA
INVESTMENT SUCH AS OUR QUICK
BUILD PROJECTS BEING DEPLOYED
ALONG AREAS ALONG MAPLE ROAD
PACKARD AND A LOT OF EMPHASIS
AND FOCUS IN PARTNERSHIP WITH
THE DEA IN OUR DOWNTOWN AREAS
WE DO HAVE E THAT SHOWS WHERE
WE'VE BEEN MAKING THOSE
ENHANCEMENTS AND TREATMENTS
SUCH AS NEW CROSSWALKS, RAPID
RECTANGULAR FLASHING BEACONS OR
RFID BUMP OUT SIDEWALKS, BIKE
LANES AND TRAFFIC.
CALL ME SO YOU CAN REALLY SEE
WHERE THOSE TREATMENT ELEMENTS
START THE UP.
>> LUKE, DID THAT REALLY
ADDRESS YOUR QUESTION OR PROMPT
?
YES.
YEP, YEP.
IF WE CAN ADD SOME DETAILS AS
TO SAY FOR A KEY INTERSECTION
WE'RE MORE LOOKING TOWARD
MITIGATION MEASURES THAT CAN
APPLY CAN BE APPLIED LOCALLY TO
AN INTERSECTION TO ADDRESS THE
TYPE OF CONFLICT THAT ARE
RESULT FROM CROSSING POINTS AND
FOR TIERED CORRIDORS.
THOSE ARE THOSE COULD BE SOME
OTHER SELECTION OF MITIGATION
MEASURES LIKE MITHRIL CROSSINGS
OR CROSS-SECTIONAL CHANGES THAT
ARE ADDRESSING THE THE RESULTS
FROM DANGEROUS BEHAVIORS THAT
ARE REALLY STRETCHED ALONG A
CORRIDOR THEN JUST PICK A SPOT
TREATMENT AT ONE INTERSECTION
AND FOLLOWING UP ON LUKE'S
EXAMPLES OF THOSE THOSE ARE THE
DESIGN ELEMENTS THAT WE WOULD
REALLY BE LOOKING AT IN THOSE
TWO DIFFERENT SCENARIOS AND
ALSO THINKING THROUGH THAT
SLIDE THAT SUZANNE HAD UP WITH
THE ITEMS FROM THE PLAN AND A
LOT OF CASES WE DO NOT HAVE
DEDICATED FUNDING.
WE HAVE SOME DEDICATED GRANT
FUNDING BUT WE DO NOT
NECESSARILY HAVE FUNDING THAT'S
CARVED OUT AND SET ASIDE
EXPLICITLY FOR FOR THESE
PROJECTS THE WHERE WE GET THE
VAST AMOUNT OF OUR WORK DONE IS
IN PARTNERSHIP WITH OTHER
PROJECTS.
THERE MAY BE A SAFETY PROJECT
THAT'S IN THE THAT HAS A VIP
PROJECT THAT IT IDENTIFIES WHAT
SOME OF THOSE SAFETY FEATURES
COULD BE THAT MAY BE LISTED AS
A NON MOTORIZED PROJECT OR
LISTED AS SORT AND OTHER OTHER
TRANSPORTATION OR IF THERE'S
SIGNALS PROJECT THAT'S GOING
THAT IT COULD BE INVOLVED BUT
THAT WILL THEN BE PARTNERED
WITH ANOTHER TYPE OF CAPITAL
PROJECT SUCH AS A RESURFACING
PROJECT OR A WATER MAIN PROJECT
WHERE WE ARE ABLE TO REALLY
LOOK AT A STREET
COMPREHENSIVELY AND BE ABLE TO
DO GET MORE DONE AND THAT GOES
BACK TO HOW THE CAPITAL
IMPROVEMENT PLANNING PROCESS
USES THIS INFORMATION.
AND IF YOU HAVE A PROJECT WHERE
THE PROJECT HAS BEEN SCOPED OUT
TO INCLUDE THESE SAFETY
PROJECTS OR IT'S PARTNERING
WITH A SAFETY PROJECT AND
YOU'RE LOOKING AT MULTIPLE
TYPES OF SAFETY IMPROVEMENTS IN
A PROJECT, THEN THAT PROJECT IS
GOING TO SCORE HIGHER THAN
ANOTHER PROJECT THAT DOES NOT
INCLUDE THOSE TYPES
OF PROJECTS.
SO WHEN WE LOOK AT HOW TO SPEND
THE MONEY THAT WE HAVE TO SPEND
THESE FOCUS CORRIDORS ARE
REALLY HELPING TO INFORM THAT
WORK REGARDLESS OF THE TYPE
OF WORK THAT IT IS.
>> I DON'T KNOW WHAT HAPPENED
THOUGH IS THAT IS THE CAPITAL
IMPROVEMENT PLAN THE ONLY THE
ONLY PLACE WHERE THIS GETS USED
LIKE FOR EXAMPLE I'M THINKING
OF THE RESOLUTION THAT ASKED
FOR US TO DO ROAD DIETZE OR
REVALUATE ROAD DIETZE
EVERYWHERE IT SEEMS LIKE WE
SHOULD BE LOOKING AT TIER ONE
FIRST THA WHAT WE'RE DOING
WITH THIS HERE INFORMATION WE
EVALUATING TIER ONE SEGMENTS
FIRST ROAD I BELIEVE THAT WORK
IS ALL ONGOING AND ALL MULTI
LANE ROADWAYS UNDER THE
JURISDICTION OF THE CITY OF ANN
ARBOR ARE BEING EVALUATED AND
ASSESSED FOR THAT I BELIEVE
THERE IS MY COLLEAGUE TREVOR
BRIDEN IS ALSO WORKING ON THAT
SO I I CAN'T SPEAK ANY MORE TO
THAT.
I'M NOT SURE IF LUKE WOULD LIKE
TO ADD SOME ADDITIONAL CONTEXT
.
YEAH, TREVOR CAN DRIVE IF YOU
WANT SOME IN GENERAL WHILE
WE'RE PREPARING WE'RE NEAR THE
PUBLICATION OF A REQUEST FOR
PROPOSALS ON THAT EFFORT AND
THE YOUR LOCATION IS DEFINITELY
A HUGE IMPACT FACTOR INTO THE
ANALYSIS FOR THAT AND FOR THE
COMBINATION OF MULTIPLE
PARAMETERS.
WE'RE ALSO CONSIDERING THE I
GUESS THE THE FEASIBILITY, THE
IMPACT THE RESULTS OF OVERALL
WITH THAT SO SAFETY PERFORMANCE
GEAR LOCATIONS THAT'S AN
IMPORTANT FACTOR IN THAT
EXERCISE.
>> BUT THE REQUEST FOR QUOTE
THAT YOU'RE PUTTING OUT IS FOR
THE ANALYSIS AND IT'S GOING TO
IT'S GOING TO BE FOR ALL
OF THEM AT ONE TIME.
I'M UNDERSTANDING THAT WE'RE
NOT ANALYZING THEM POTENTIALLY
ANALYZING THEM ALL AT ONE TIME
.
THOSE ARE GOING TO BE WELL IF I
UNDERSTAND THE QUESTION
CORRECTLY, I THINK EACH HORWITT
OR EVEN SEGMENTS OF THOSE
CORRIDORS WILL BE INDEPENDENTLY
ANALYZED SO THAT WE'RE NOT I
GUYS WE'RE TRYING THE BEST TO I
GUESS TO TO GRAB THE LOW
HANGING FRUIT IF THERE IS ANY
SO THAT WE CAN TAKE THE FIRST
OPPORTUNITY TO DEPLOY ANY
ROEDAD SO SO THAT WE'RE NOT
RESTRICTING THE CHOICE
OF STREETS BY THE ENTIRE RANGE
OF THAT THE ONE STREET.
BUT RATHER THAN LOOKING AT A I
GUESS A FINAL RESOLUTION
OF SEGMENTS ON THE MAP.
OK, THANKS.
THANK YOU.
AND IT APPEARS AT THE NEXT
SLIDE AS THE LAST SLIDE I
BELIEVE ONE OF THEM MAY BE
MISSING.
IT WAS REALLY JUST A SLIDE
ABOUT NEXT STEPS SO AFTER OUR
DISCUSSION TONIGHT WE WILL BE
RERUNNING THE GAS ANALYSIS TO
LOOK AT WHAT THE NEW POTENTIAL
CORRIDORS AND INTERSECTIONS
WOULD BE WITH THE UPDATED CRASH
WAITING AND SEGMENTATION AND
CRASH DATA.
THAT'S GREAT AND HOPEFULLY WE
CAN THAT CAN COME BACK TO THIS
COMMISSION AT SOME POINT IN THE
NEAR FUTURE TO SEE HOW IT LOOKS
AND THAT IS ABSOLUTE.
THAT WOULD BE OUR INTENTION AS
WELL.
GOOD, GOOD.
>> ONE LAST QUESTION AFTER THE
ANALYSIS IS RUN LIKE WHERE DO I
FIND IT?
DOES THAT ON A DASHBOARD OR IS
IT GOING TO REPORT LIKE A
SINGLE DOCUMENT TO WHERE DO WE
CHOOSE IT ON LINE LIKE IT IS
NOW ON OUR MAP PLAYER WHICH IS
ALL AVAILABLE AND ACCESSIBLE TO
THE PUBLIC.
BUT AGAIN, LIKE I SAID, THAT
ANALYSIS DOES NEED TO BE RERUN
AND AND WE WOULD REVIEW IT AND
I BELIEVE BRING IT HERE FIRST
FOR DISCUSSION PRESENTATION AND
THEN BE ABLE TO MAKE THAT
AVAILABLE TO THE GENERAL PUBLIC
AND THEY WOULD SUPERSEDE MAPS
THAT ARE IN THE PLAN WHICH IF
YOU HAVE A PDF COPY OF THE PLAN
YOU CAN SEE THEM THERE BUT IT'S
REALLY HARD TO READ.
SO WE ALWAYS RECOMMEND THAT YOU
LOOK AT THE WEALTH OF OUR
ONLINE MAPS AND CHECK OUT THAT
TRANSPORT MAP.
>> THERE'S A LOT OF GOOD
INFORMATION IN THERE.
>> I AGREE.
ARE THERE ANY OTHER QUESTIONS
OR COMMENTS ON THIS TOPIC OR IF
NOT THANK YOU VERY MUCH FOR
BRINGING THAT BOARD.
LOOK FORWARD TO SEEING OUR VIA
THE NEW WEIGHTING SHAKE SO ALL
RIGHT.
MOVING ON THE NEXT TOPIC IS THE
DOWNTOWN AREA CIRCULATION'S
STUDY.
THE CITY AND THE DOWNTOWN
DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY ARE
WORKING ON THE DOWNTOWN AREA
CIRCULATION'S STUDY TO EVALUATE
MULTIMODAL USER SERVICES
DOWNTOWN AND SURROUNDING AREAS.
SO IN THIS PRESENTATION STAFF
WILL BE REPORTING BACK AFTER
THE STUDIES.
SECOND PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT
SESSION FROM LAST MONTH.
THE CONSULTANT
TEAM AND TREVOR
ROGERS, THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> THE CHAIRMAN OF MONKEY I'D
LIKE TO INTRODUCE AS PART
OF THIS KILEY WHO IS THE
CONSULTANT LEAD ON THIS ON THIS
PROJECT.
WE'RE GOING TO BE PRESENTING
SOME OF THE SAME MATERIAL AS
LAST MONTH FOR THE BENEFIT
OF THOSE WHO WERE HERE AND THE
BENEFIT OF THOSE WHO ARE NOT
YET PART OF THIS COMMISSION.
>> LAST MONTH WE ALSO HAD A A
ENGAGEMENT OPEN HOUSE, AN ALL
DAY ENGAGEMENT OPEN HOUSE THAT
WE HAD QUITE A BIT OF FEEDBACK
AND TO WANT TO REPORT BACK ON
THAT AND SO WITHOUT FURTHER
ADO, I'D LIKE TO INTRODUCE
OLIVER TO TO PRESENT ON THE
STUDY.
>> THANK YOU.
THANKS, TREVOR.
HELLO.
GOOD TO SEE MANY OF YOU AGAIN.
I'M OLIVER LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT
WITH SMITH GROUP HERE IN ANN
ARBOR, MICHIGAN AND THE LEAD
FROM THE CONSULTING TEAM
PERSPECTIVE ON THE DOWNTOWN
AREA CIRCULATION STUDY.
SO AS MENTIONED WE'VE BEEN
WORKING WITH TREVOR AND OTHER
CITY TRANSPORTATION STAFF AS
WELL AS THE DIVA STAFF ON THIS
PROJECT AND COMING ON KIND
OF YEAR AND A HALF MARK AND
GETTING INTO A FINAL STRETCH ON
THIS.
SO AS TREVOR MENTIONED, MUCH
OF THIS PRESENTATION, THE UP
FRONT CHUNK OF IT WAS WILL BE
SOMEWHAT REPETITIVE FROM WHAT
WAS SHARED IN OCTOBER BUT
WANTED TO PROVIDE A HIGH LEVEL
RUN THROUGH OF IT FOR THE NEW
HIGH LEVEL RUN-THROUGH OF IT
FOR THE NEW COMMISSION MEMBERS
TO EVERYBODY UP TO SPEED AND
THEN THERE ARE SOME ADDITIONAL
SLIDES AT THE END SUMMARIZING
NEXT STEPS AND THE
OCTOBER ENGAGEMENT AND JUST I'M
ASSUMING EVERYBODY SEES MY
SCREEN BUT I SHOULD ASK FOR A
CLARITY.
OK, SO WE HAD NOTHING AWESOME.
I'M SO QUICK REMINDER THE
CIRCULATION STUDY IS REALLY
LOOKING AT FOUR INTERWOVEN AND
OVERLAPPING AREAS OF WORK.
SO IT'S LOOKING AT THE BICYCLE
SYSTEM TRANSIT ENHANCEMENTS,
THE PEDESTRIAN ENVIRONMENT AND
THE STREET NETWORK AS A WHOLE.
OBVIOUSLY A LOT OF THE ONGOING
PLANNING WORK IN THE CITY IS
FEEDING INTO THIS WORK
INCLUDING EIGHT TO ZERO PLAN.
OF COURSE THE CITY'S
COMPREHENSIVE TRANSPORTATION
PLAN MOVING TOGETHER, THE D.A.
HAS ANNOUNCED A PROGRAM FOCUSED
AROUND PLACEMAKING THAT'S WOVEN
INTO SOME OF THE
RECOMMENDATIONS AS WELL AS SOME
OF THE INITIATIVES AROUND
AFFORDABLE HOUSING AND
AFFORDABILITY IN THE CITY TODAY
ALSO AS PART OF THEIR ONGOING
WORK TO UPDATE THEIR
DEVELOPMENT PLAN IS REVAMPING
SOME OF THEIR GOALS.
AND SO THIS PROCESS HAS BEEN AN
OPPORTUNITY BENCHMARKS SOME
OF THOSE GOALS AND USE THOSE
ASSETS MOVING FORWARD.
SO YOU CAN SEE THERE WAS A
SCREEN HERE.
THIS WAS A SUMMARY JUST A BRIEF
SUMMARY FROM WHAT WAS SHARED
LAST TIME OF SOME OF THE KEY
ENGAGEMENT TAKEAWAYS FROM THE
ROUND OF PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT.
IT TOOK PLACE MUCH EARLIER THIS
YEAR IN MARCH AND EARLY APRIL.
SOME OF THE I THINK KEY THEMES
JUST TO PULL ACROSS ALL
OF THESE TOPICS IS REALLY A
VERY BROAD AND HAPPILY
SURPRISING LEVEL OF SUPPORT FOR
A LOT OF THE IDEAS AND
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT ARE BEING
TEED UP BY PLAN.
AND IN THAT FIRST ROUND
OF ENGAGEMENT SOME OF THE IDEAS
WERE A LITTLE BIT MORE SPECIFIC
AROUND SOME OF THE BIKE
CONNECTION IDEAS.
SOME WERE JUST PRESENTED AS
VERY GENERAL BROAD
RECOMMENDATIONS LIKE HERE'S THE
KINDS OF THINGS THAT WE COULD
DO TO IMPROVE TRANSIT
INFRASTRUCTURE DOWNTOWN AND
THAT GENERALLY GOT FAVORABLE
SUPPORT.
AND AS WE WENT THROUGH THE
WORKSHOPS IN OCTOBER WE WERE
ABLE TO PROVIDE MUCH MORE
SPECIFIC RECOMMENDATIONS ACROSS
ALL THE TOPICS YOU'LL SEE A
VERSION OF THIS SLIDE AT THE
END OF SUMMARIZES SOME OF THAT
ENGAGEMENT I THINK ONE THING
THAT'S IMPORTANT TO SHARE IS
JUST THE CONTEXT OF DOWNTOWN
AND HOW VISITORS BOTH IN
DIFFERENT TRIPS INTO THE
DOWNTOWN AREA WHETHER THAT BY
VISITORS, EMPLOYEES OR
RESIDENTS THAT LIVE DOWNTOWN IS
CHANGED KIND OF PRE AND POST
PANDEMIC.
AND THE BIG TAKEAWAY FROM THIS
SLIDE IS THAT OVERALL VISITS
THE DOWNTOWN ARE BACK ABOVE
KIND OF PRE PANDEMIC LEVELS AND
YOU CAN SEE TWENTY TWENTY THREE
TOTALS FOR THE YEAR VERSUS
TWENTY NINETEEN.
BUT WE'RE SEEING A SHIFT WHERE
THERE'S FEWER EMPLOYEE VISITS
BUT THERE'S MORE DOWNTOWN
RESIDENT AND VISITOR TRIPS.
SO THERE'S A LITTLE BIT OF A
SHIFT IN THE DEMOGRAPHICS WHO'S
COMING DOWNTOWN?
>> MUCH OF THE CIRCULATION
STUDY WHERE WE'VE ALSO BEEN
COLLECTING MULTIMODAL DATA
USING TOOLS LIKE REPLICA AND
PLACE II TO ASSESS SOME OF THE
CORRIDORS WHERE IMPROVEMENTS
HAVE BEEN MADE IN RECENT YEARS
AS WE PLAN AND LOOK AHEAD TO
FUTURE IMPROVEMENTS AND THESE
ARE SOME OF THE KIND
OF HIGHLIGHTED STATISTICS THE
PULLOUT AND IT'S INTERESTING TO
NOTE THAT WHERE PROJECTS HAVE
MADE INVESTMENTS IN THE STREET
INFRASTRUCTURE MADE
IMPROVEMENTS WE ACTUALLY ARE
SEEING MORE VISITS AND MORE
ACTIVITY HAPPENING ON THOSE
STREETS COMPARED TO THE
SURROUNDING AREA AS A WHOLE
WHEN THEY COMPARE
PRECONSTRUCTION TO POST
CONSTRUCTION WE'RE ACTUALLY
SEEING IS INVESTMENT HELPING TO
DRIVE ACTIVITY AND VISITORSHIP
ALONG THESE CORRIDORS WHICH IS
GREAT TO SEE IT AND YEAH, THERE
IS A RECTANGULAR BOX TO THE
VERY RIGHT SIDE OF THE SLIDE
APPEARS LIKE PAPER WEIGHT
BLOCKING PART OF IT AND OH THIS
THING YEAH.
>> YEAH.
YOUR MOUTH SEEMS TO BE ABLE TO
CHANGE THE SIZE OF IT.
>> OK THERE WE GO.
IS THAT BETTER LOOKING LIKE
MAYBE FIVE PERCENT OF THE AREA
?
IT DOESN'T REALLY MATTER THAT
MUCH.
YEAH OK IT'S GOOD OK THANKS
APPRECIATE THAT.
THANKS.
THAT WAS THE ZOOM WINDOW.
>> DIDN'T REALIZE THAT WOOD IS
GETTING SHARED SO ANYWAY JUST
GOOD TO SEE INVESTMENT IN THE
DOWNTOWN MAKE TRANSLATING INTO
MAINTAINING AND PROMOTING
ACTIVITY AND JUST BUILDING OFF
OF THE PRIOR PRESENTATION.
ONE OF THE GOOD NEWS FROM A
SAFETY STANDPOINT IS MANY
OF THE PROJECTS THAT HAVE BEEN
BUILT IN RECENT YEARS REALLY
HAVE LED TO THE KIND OF SAFETY
OUTCOMES THAT WERE ANTICIPATED
.
SO THE TWO WAY RESTORATION ON
FIRST AND ASHLEY STREET FOR
INSTANCE ARE SEEING A REDUCTION
IN SPEEDS ALONG THE CORRIDOR
AFTER THE TWO WAY RESTORATION
SEEING REDUCTIONS ACROSS THE
BOARD AND CRASH RATES ON THOSE
CORRIDORS.
THE BIKEWAYS HAVE LED TO SAFER
OUTCOMES FOR ALL USERS OF THE
STREET EVEN THOUGH BICYCLE
TRAFFIC HAS CONTINUED TO
INCREASE.
AND THEN JUST AN EXAMPLE FROM
WITHIN DETROIT PROJECT AND THE
KOREATOWN AREA OF DESTRY SIDE
IMPROVEMENTS THEY ARE REALLY
DRAMATICALLY IMPROVED
COMPLIANCE FOR PEOPLE STOPPING
FOR PEDESTRIANS.
>> SO ONE AND TWO HIGHLIGHT FOR
EACH OF THE FOUR PROJECT AREAS
THE CIRCULATION STUDY A LITTLE
BIT OF THE RATIONALE FOR WHY
SOME OF THESE THINGS MATTER.
I THINK THESE ARE HELPFUL
TALKING POINTS TO BE SHARED
WITH THE COMMUNITY AND THESE
ARE PART OF THE PRESENTATION
MATERIALS AND THE WORKSHOPS IN
OCTOBER .
>> BUT I EQUITY IS AN IMPORTANT
GOAL FROM THE CITY AND A LOT
OF WHY WE'RE DOING THIS IS
RECOGNIZING THAT I'M NOT
EVERYBODY IS ABLE TO DRIVE OR
IS WILLING TO DRIVE OR DESIRES
TO DRIVE OR CAN AFFORD TO OWN A
CAR.
AND SO FOR PEOPLE THAT ARE
RELIANT ON OTHER MODES
OF TRANSPORTATION, BIKING IS
ONE OF THOSE WAYS ALONG WITH
TRANSIT RIDERSHIP AND WALKING
AND JUST RECOGNIZING THAT MORE
PEOPLE WANT TO BE ABLE TO BIKE.
THEY NEED TO BE ABLE TO SAFELY
AND COMFORTABLE COMFORTABLY DO
THAT TO GET THE GET TO THEIR
DESTINATIONS AND JUST
RECOGNIZING THAT CONVENTIONAL
BIKE LANES ARE AND BEEN A
STRONG STEPPING STONE KIND
OF MOVING FORWARD.
BUT NOT EVERYBODY IS GOING TO
BE COMFORTABLE USING
CONVENTIONAL BIKE LANES ON
CERTAIN KINDS OF STREETS,
PARTICULARLY HIGHER VOLUME OR
HIGHER SPEED STREETS WHICH HAS
LED TO IMPLEMENTATION
OF MULTIPLE SEPARATED BIKEWAYS
NOT JUST DOWNTOWN BUT IN OTHER
PARTS OF THE CITY AS WELL TO BE
MORE COMFORTABLE FOR PEOPLE
OF ALL AGES AND ABILITIES.
AND ONE OF THE IMPORTANT KIND
OF RATIONALES FOR THE FOR THE
DOWNTOWN CIRCULATION STUDY WAS
THIS IDEA BUILDING CONNECTIONS
TO THE DOWNTOWN BIKEWAY LOOP
AND RECOGNIZING THAT WE DON'T
NEED TO HAVE SEPARATED
FACILITIES ON EVERY STREET IN
ORDER TO CREATE ACCESS AND THE
KIND OF CONNECTIVITY THAT WE
WANT TO FOCUSING ON THAT
SEPARATED NETWORK THAT PROVIDES
CONNECTION TO MOST AREAS OF THE
DOWNTOWN WITHIN ONE TO TWO
BLOCKS SPACING AND THEN IT
CERTAINLY CAN BE OTHER
IMPROVEMENT ON STREETS IN
BETWEEN TO CREATE A MORE
COMFORTABLE ENVIRONMENT.
BUT ULTIMATELY SOME OF THOSE
OUTCOMES THROUGH THE BICYCLE
PROJECT SLOWING SPEEDS,
BOOSTING CARS ON THE ROAD PLAYS
INTO OUR CARBON EMISSION
REDUCTION GOALS THAT THE CITY
HAS AND EXPANDING CHOICES FOR
EVERYONE.
SO I MENTIONED THIS SOME OF THE
STRATEGIES HERE BUT CONNECTED
HAVING THIS CONNECTED LOW
STRESS NETWORK AND REALLY
EMPHASIZING TO THE CIRCULATION
STUDY THOSE CONNECTIONS INTO
ADJACENT NEIGHBORHOOD AREAS AND
THEN UTILIZING A VARIETY
OF DIFFERENT TREATMENTS
SEPARATED BIKEWAYS BOULEVARD'S
IN SOME LOCATIONS AND REDUCE
SALES IN SOME LOCATIONS TO BE
ABLE TO MAKE THOSE CONNECTION
POINTS.
SO THE MAJOR PROJECTS THAT WERE
TEED UP FROM A BIKEWAYS
STANDPOINT ARE THE BICYCLE
NETWORK STANDPOINT.
YOU CAN SEE THOSE HERE I'M
EXTENDING TO CATHERINE AND
MILLER STREET BIKEWAY EAST OUT
TO THE U OF M MEDICAL CAMPUS
EXTENDING THE DIVISION STREET
NORTH UP TO THE BROADWAY BRIDGE
AND MAKING IMPROVEMENTS TO THAT
MESSY KIND OF BROADWAY
INTERCHANGE AREA.
THE MORE COMFORTABLY GET
CYCLISTS ONTO THE SIDE CARS
THAT RUN ALONG THE EDGES OF THE
BRIDGE EXTENDING THE SIDE PATH
TREATMENT ON THE NORTH SIDE
OF THE BROADWAY BRIDGE OVER TO
THE TRAIL ON PLYMOUTH THAT'S
PROJECT THREE.
NUMBER FOUR IS LOOKING AT A
EXTENSION THE FIRST STREET
BIKEWAY NORTH TO TWO AND
THROUGH SEVEN TWENTY ONE NORTH
MAIN STREET OVER TO SUMMIT
STREET BE ABLE TO CONNECT BOTH
BACK TO THE BROADWAY AREA BUT
ALSO TO THE BERM TUNNEL ON
FIFTH AND AND THEN THE FIFTH
PROJECT IS THE WASHINGTON
STREET BIKE BOULEVARD'S THAT
WOULD CONNECT ON WASHINGTON
STREET FROM THE FIRST STREET
BIKE LANE WEST ALL THE WAY TO
RAVINA WHERE WASHINGTON STREET
IT ENDS AND THEN AS YOU ALL MAY
KNOW THE MILLER BIKEWAY WAS
KIND OF TEED UP EARLY GOING
INTO THIS PROJECT IN A SENSE
MOVED ALONG A PARALLEL TRACK AT
A KIND OF A FASTER PACE AND I
BELIEVE HIS PLAN FOR
IMPLEMENTATION NEXT YEAR ON THE
TRANSIT ENHANCEMENT STANDPOINT
SIMILAR RATIONALE A LITTLE BIT
DIFFERENT.
BUT I THINK IT'S IMPORTANT TO
ACKNOWLEDGE THAT THE CITY
OF ANN ARBOR HAS A LOT
OF PRESSURE FOR GROWTH AND A
LOT OF OUR CONVERSATION AROUND
TRANSIT ENHANCEMENT HAS ALSO
BEEN GOING ON IN PARALLEL WITH
CONVERSATION ABOUT THE CITY
WIDE COMMUNITY COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN THAT'S UNDERWAY AS WELL
WHICH IS ALSO DENSIFYING
OPPORTUNITIES FOR ADDITIONAL
GROWTH AND DENSIFICATION IN
AREAS ACROSS THE CITY.
AND AS ANN ARBOR GROWS, THE
ROADS AND THE PUBLIC RIGHT
OF WAYS ARE GETTING BIGGER AND
NON DRIVING MODES
OF TRANSPORTATION ARE GOING TO
BE INCREASINGLY IMPORTANT AND
THAT IS ESPECIALLY INCLUDES
TRANSIT AND RECOGNIZING THAT
DOWNTOWN IS A KEY HUB FOR
TRANSIT ACTIVITY AND TRANSIT
CONNECTIVITY.
SO HOW BUSSES ARE ABLE TO GET
TO THE DOWNTOWN THE BLAK
TRANSIT CENTER AND BE ABLE TO
PROVIDE EFFICIENT AND
ECONOMICAL SERVICE IS REALLY
CRITICAL TO MAKE TRANSIT A
VIABLE OPTION FOR A GROWING
POPULATION HERE IN THE CITY AND
THAT ALSO TIES INTO SIMILAR
EQUITY FACTORS.
MANY PEOPLE WHO DO NOT OWN A
VEHICLE OR DON'T HAVE ACCESS TO
A VEHICLE ARE RELIANT ON
TRANSIT TO GET AROUND AND
THAT'S OFTEN A MAJOR BARRIER
FOR FOLKS AND IT CAN TAKE A
LONG TIME AND SO MANY OF THE
RIDES PLANNED IMPROVEMENTS TO
TRANSIT SERVICE THAT WOULD
PROVIDE GREATER HEADWAYS FASTER
FREQUENCIES ARE ALSO CONTINGENT
ON BEING ABLE TO GET TO THE
TRANSIT CENTER AND OTHER KEY
DESTINATION EFFICIENTLY.
SO THAT'S THE RATIONALE FOR
SOME OF THE TRANSIT
IMPROVEMENTS YOU HAVEN'T SEEN
IT THIS IS JUST A SNIPPET FROM
THE RIDE TWENTY FORTY FIVE LONG
RANGE PLAN THAT IN PARTICULAR
IDENTIFIES AN EAST WEST AND
NORTH SOUTH CORRIDOR FOR BUS
RAPID TRANSIT AS WELL AS
PRIORITY SERVICES.
YOU CAN SEE THAT IN THAT DARKER
RED LINE AND IN THE DARKER BLUE
LINES WHEN THIS PLANNING WAS
DONE SOME OF THE CORRIDORS WERE
UNDERSTOOD BUT EXACTLY HOW THEY
WERE GETTING TO AND THROUGH THE
DOWNTOWN AREA WAS LEFT A LITTLE
VAGUE TO BE DETERMINED AND SO
THE TRANSPORT THAT IS DOWNTOWN
AREA CIRCULATION STUDY IS AN
OPPORTUNITY TO WORK WITH THE
RIDE IN WITH YOU AGAIN TO
UNDERSTAND WHAT ARE THE REAL
KIND OF KEY TRANSIT CORRIDORS
DOWNTOWN WHERE WE CAN EMPHASIZE
AND LOCATE SOME OF THESE
IMPROVEMENTS.
SO SOME OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS
INCLUDE THINGS LIKE TRANSIT
SIGNAL PRIORITY WHICH THE SUITE
OF DIFFERENT TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS
THAT ALLOW BUSSES TO HAVE A
DYNAMIC RELATIONSHIP WITH
TRAFFIC SIGNALS SO THAT TRAFFIC
SIGNAL TIMING CAN BE ADJUSTED
TO LET BUSSES CLEAR
INTERSECTIONS OR GIVE US
ADDITIONAL GREEN TIME AND THE
DIRECTION THAT WE'RE GOING TO
BE TO GET THROUGH AN
INTERSECTION.
WE'RE LOOKING AT SOME
OPPORTUNITIES TO JUMP LANES
WHERE YOU CAN TAKE A CURBSIDE
LANE AND ALLOW BUSSES TO
ESSENTIALLY GET TO THE FRONT
OF THE PACK WHEN THEY WAIT FOR
THE SIGNAL THE CHANGE TO HELP
MAINTAIN THEIR TIMING TRANSIT
ONLY LANES IS WAS CONSIDERED AS
PART OF THE CIRCULATION STUDY
MAINLY IN REGARDS TO HOW BUS
RAPID TRANSIT OR BRT COULD BE
IMPLEMENTED.
>> SPEAK TO THAT IN A MOMENT
AND THEN JUST ADDITIONAL
OPPORTUNITIES TO KEEP ENHANCING
TRANSIT STOPS ALONG LONG BUS
ROUTES.
SO WHERE WE LANDED IN OUR
CONVERSATIONS WITH THEM IN
ATHEA WAS REALLY IDENTIFYING A
NUMBER KEY CORRIDORS WHERE
TRANSIT THERE'S A SENSE
OF WHERE CERTAIN TRANSIT
IMPROVEMENTS WOULD BE HIGHLY
DESIRABLE.
THE TIMING OF THESE IS STILL TO
BE DETERMINED BUT ONE OF THE
BIGGER MOVES THAT WOULD BE
LOOKING AT ADDING TRANSIT ONLY
LANES TO HURON STREET AS PART
OF THAT EAST-WEST BRT CORRIDOR
WHICH WOULD RUN WEST ALL THE
WAY OUT ON JACKSON ROAD AND
EAST ALL THE WAY OUT TO L.A.
POTENTIALLY.
>> SO THAT'S THAT WAS A MAJOR
ONE BOTH FOURTH AND FIFTH AVE.
THERE'S OPPORTUNITIES FOR DOING
TSP OR TRANSIT SIGNAL PRIORITY
REALLY TO PROVIDE MORE RELIABLE
AND KIND OF EASY ACCESS FOR
BUSSES COMING TO AND FROM THE
BLAKE TRANSIT CENTER TO GET
BACK ON TO HERE ON STREET OR TO
OTHER KIND OF MAJOR CORRIDORS
THAT THEY'RE TAKING TO ACCESS
THE REST OF THE NETWORK.
>> ITEM NUMBER FOUR IS OVER AT
GLENANNE FULLER.
SIMILARLY THIS SECTION OF GLEN
IS KIND OF A MAJOR TRAFFIC
CONDUIT INTO THE DOWNTOWN AREA
.
I'M FROM FULLER STREET SO
THERE'S AN OPPORTUNITY TO LOOK
AT TRANSIT IQ JUMPS IN TFP
THERE AND THEN I KNOW THE TOPIC
WAS BROUGHT UP EARLIER ABOUT
LOOKING AT ROAD DIET AND ONE
OF THE THINGS THAT WE WANTED TO
EMPHASIZE IN THIS AND I'M
REALIZING NOW THAT THERE'S TWO
SIDES FIVE ON THE SOUTH SIDE
SHOULD NOT BE HERE THAT'S PART
OF A POTENTIAL U OF M PROPOSE
TRANSIT CENTER.
SO IGNORE THAT FIVE BUT THE
FIVE THAT'S UP HERE IS ON
BROADWAY, THE BROADWAY BRIDGE
AREA.
>> WE LOOKED AT BROADWAY BRIDGE
AS PART OF THE STUDY.
IT'S CURRENTLY FOUR LANES DID
AN ASSESSMENT FOR POTENTIAL
ROAD GETTING THERE WHICH I CAN
SPEAK TO IN A MINUTE.
THERE'S QUESTIONS ABOUT THAT
AND THE FEELING WAS THAT WE
ACTUALLY WOULD POTENTIALLY WANT
TO RESERVE SPACE ON THAT ROAD
FOR A DEDICATED TRANSIT LANE
AND AT LEAST ONE DIRECTION
PROBABLY THE INBOUND DIRECTION
TO SUPPORT AN EVENTUAL NORTH
SOUTH CONNECTION FROM FIFTH
OF UP TO BROADWAY AND OUT ON
PLYMOUTH ALSO FOR THE RIDES BRT
THOSE ARE SOME OF THE TRANSIT
RECOMMENDATIONS ON OVERALL
STREET NETWORK IMPROVEMENTS.
THIS TOPIC REALLY STARTED WITH
A FOCUS PRIMARILY AROUND
EVALUATING A TWO WAY STREET OR
EXCUSE ME ONE WAY STREET
RESTORATION'S BACKED A TWO WAY
STREET TRAVEL BUT THERE ARE A
NUMBER OF OTHER TOPICS THAT WE
WERE LOOKING AT FROM A SAFETY
AND WAYFINDING AND KIND
ACTIVITY STANDPOINT.
>> BUT ONE OF THE KIND OF KEY
RATIONALES IS JUST RECOGNIZING
ONE WAY STREETS CAN PRIORITIZE
VEHICLE FLOW BUT THAT'S OFTEN
AT THE EXPENSE OF EASE
OF NAVIGATION.
>> AND SO FROM A DOWNTOWN
COMMERCIAL DISTRICT STANDPOINT,
NO ONE IS MAKE IT CONFUSING FOR
PEOPLE TO FIGURE OUT HOW TO GET
TO WHERE THEY WANT TO GET TO
CAN SOMETIMES ADD LENGTH TO
PEOPLE'S TRIPS AS THEY
CIRCULATE AROUND AND IT ALSO IS
AN ALWAYS THE MOST COMFORTABLE
ENVIRONMENT FOR LOCATING
BUSINESSES, CREATING A KIND
OF PEDESTRIAN ENVIRONMENT
THAT'S FRONTING ONTO THOSE
STREETS.
SO THERE'S OPPORTUNITIES TO
LOOK AT DOING TO RESTORATION'S
TO HELP SLOW AND CALM TRAFFIC
AND THE ROAD ENVIRONMENT
SIMILAR TO WHAT WE SAW ON THE
FIRST ASHLEY STREET TO A
RESTORATION AND AGAIN THAT'S
PRIMARILY ALL TO HELP CREATE A
SAFER ENVIRONMENT AND SUPPORT
KIND OF THE ACTIVITY IN THE
ENERGY AND THE VIBRANCY
OF DOWNTOWN.
>> SO KIND BROADLY THINGS THAT
WERE BEING LOOKED AT WAS THE
TWO WAY STREET RESTORATION'S WE
ALSO THROUGH THIS WORK
EVALUATED A NUMBER DOWNTOWN
INTERSECTIONS TO EXPLORE
WHETHER THE SIGNALS CAN BE
REMOVED AND THE ROAD THE
INTERSECTION CAN BE CONVERTED
TO AN ALWAYS STOPPED
CONFIGURATION AND THEN
IDENTIFYING LOCATIONS FOR OTHER
SIGNAL ENHANCEMENTS THAT WOULD
NEED TO BE DONE OR OTHER KINDS
OF INTERSECTION IMPROVEMENTS TO
HELP IMPROVE SAFETY AND IN
PARTICULAR SOME OF THE ONES
AROUND THE INTERSECTION
IMPROVEMENT WORK ARE THINGS
THAT ARE GOING TO BE LOOKED AT
THROUGH PARALLEL EFFORTS LIKE
THE SAFE STREETS FOR PROGRAM
THOUGH SOME OF THE KEY KIND
OF RECOMMENDATIONS THAT CAME
OUT OF THIS ONE AND TWO IS
LOOKING AT A RESTORATION
OF FIFTH AVENUE DIVISION FROM
PACARD UP TO BEEKS AND
RESTORING THOSE TO TWO WAY
TRAVEL FROM AN OPERATIONAL
STANDPOINT THAT APPEARS TO BE
WORKABLE AND FEASIBLE IN OUR
ASSESSMENT OF THIS AT A
PLANNING LEVEL
THIS WOULD
REQUIRE BEEKS STREET TO ALSO BE
RESTORED BACK TO TO A TRAVEL SO
THAT THAT CIRCULATION WORKS
GOING IN BOTH DIRECTIONS AND
THAT DOES ALSO IN NECESSITATE A
TOTAL RECONSTRUCTION OF THE
BROADWAY INTERCHANGE AREA WHICH
TODAY KIND OF FUNCTIONING
ALMOST LIKE A HIGHWAY A SERIES
OF HIGHWAY ON RAMPS BUT LOOKING
AT RECONFIGURING THAT
INTERSECTION INTO A MORE NORMAL
SIGNALIZED INTERSECTION THAT
WOULD ALLOW MOVEMENT FOR THE
TWO WAY TRAVEL TO OCCUR IN A
SAFER MANNER.
NOW ALSO LOOKED AT AND STREET
NEXT TO CITY HALL RESTORING
THAT BLOCK TO TO A TRAVEL AND
THEN THROUGH THE ASSESSMENT
OF THE SIGNAL CURRENT ANALYSIS
THERE WERE TWO LOCATIONS THAT
LIBERTY AND ASHLEY AND THEN
LIBERTY AND THOMPSON THAT WE'RE
RECOMMENDING BE CONVERTED TO
ALWAYS STOPS AND HAVE THE
SIGNALS DECOMMISSIONED AT THOSE
LOCATIONS.
>> OK, LAST TOPIC ON THE
PEDESTRIAN ENVIRONMENT I THINK
THIS IS AN INTERESTING STARTING
POINT BUT IN TWENTY TWENTY
THREE THE US SURGEON GENERAL
DECLARED AN EPIDEMIC
OF LONELINESS AND ISOLATION AND
ONE OF THE MITIGATION
STRATEGIES WAS POINTING TO THE
NEED TO INCREASE OUR SOCIAL
CONNECTIONS AND USING PUBLIC
SPACE AND PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE
AND COMMUNITY ACTIVITY TO HELP
DRIVE THOSE OPPORTUNITIES TO
BRING PEOPLE TOGETHER AND WE'VE
SEEN IN CITIES ACROSS THE
COUNTRY WHERE INVESTMENTS IN
THE PEDESTRIAN ENVIRONMENT CAN
HELP PROMOTE SAFETY, REDUCE
CRIME, CREATE GENERATE ACTIVITY
,HELP SUPPORT THE ECONOMICS
OF AN AREA MORE VIBRANT
PEDESTRIAN SPACES ACTUALLY
ENCOURAGE PEOPLE TO STAY IN
SPACES LONGER WHICH CAN PAY
BACK DIVIDENDS FROM AN ECONOMIC
STANDPOINT AND FROM JUST A
GENERAL PLACEMAKING AND
COMMUNITY STANDPOINT THOUGH THE
RANGE OF DIFFERENT TYPES
OF RECOMMENDATIONS THAT ARE
BEING LOOKED AT FROM A
PEDESTRIAN ENVIRONMENT ARE
LOCATIONS FOR A POTENTIAL
FLEXIBLE STREET DESIGNS MOVING
FORWARD WHICH COULD BE CURB
LIST READS LIKE IT WAS DONE ON
STATE STREET OR OTHER SHARED
STREET CONCEPTS ENHANCEMENTS TO
SOME OF THE PUBLIC SPACES THAT
ARE EITHER ADJACENT TO OR
WITHIN PUBLIC RIGHTS AWAY
PLACEMAKING AND WAYFINDING
IMPROVEMENTS AND THOSE THREE
ARE ALL REALLY ON THE
INFRASTRUCTURE SIDE AND THEN
CONTINUING TO WORK WITH THE
BUSINESS AREA ASSOCIATIONS TO
UNDERSTAND OPPORTUNITIES FOR
SEASONAL STREET PROGRAM AND
OTHER EVENTS THAT CAN HELP
ACTIVATE THE STREET ENVIRONMENT
THAT INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENTS
COULD HELP SUPPORT ONE NOTE ON
THIS TOPIC EARLY ON IN THE
PROCESS THIS ENTIRE TOPIC WAS
FRAMED AS JUST EVENT STREET AND
IS REALLY A LITTLE BIT MORE
NARROWLY FOCUSED AROUND AND A
RECOMMENDATION FOR EVENT
MANAGEMENT AND I THINK THROUGH
THE ENGAGEMENT PROCESS WE
REALLY HEARD A DESIRE TO KIND
OF STEP BACK AND REALLY THINK
MORE HOLISTICALLY ABOUT THE
KIND OF SPACES DOWNTOWN AND HOW
STREET INVESTMENTS, STREET
INFRASTRUCTURE, PUBLIC SPACE
INFRASTRUCTURE CAN HELP SUPPORT
A BROADER RANGE OF ACTIVITIES
AND PLACEMAKING SO IT WAS
ACTUALLY A STRONG OUTCOME
OF SOME OF THE ENGAGEMENT WAS
THAT THIS TOPIC WAS ACTUALLY
EXPANDED OVER THE LAST SIX
MONTHS TO THIS MORE BROAD
PEDESTRIAN ENVIRONMENT
DISCUSSION AND A LOT OF IDEAS
CAME OUT OF THAT PROCESS
THROUGH PUBLIC FEEDBACK TO OUR
CONVERSATIONS WITH EACH OF THE
DIFFERENT BUSINESSES AREA
ASSOCIATIONS WHERE WE REALLY
SAT DOWN ONE ON ONE WITH EACH
OF THEM TO UNDERSTAND WHAT THEY
SAW AS SOME OPPORTUNITIES FOR
ENHANCING PEDESTRIAN
ENVIRONMENT.
SO YOU CAN SEE A NUMBER OF THE
PUBLIC PLAZA SPACE AND PUBLIC
PARK AREAS DOWNTOWN
OPPORTUNITIES FOR FOCUSED
INVESTMENT ENHANCEMENT TO THOSE
FROM AN OPEN SPACE STANDPOINT A
NUMBER OF STREETS INCLUDING
LIBERTY STREET ESSENTIALLY FROM
ASHELY ALL THE WAY TO STATE
STREET PORTIONS OF MAINARD AND
PORTIONS OF FOREST OR CHURCH AS
OPPORTUNITIES TO EXPLORE MORE
FLEXIBLE STREET DESIGNS
PARTICULARLY FOR LIBERTY.
THAT'S THE OPPORTUNITY TO
REALLY LEVERAGE THAT CORRIDOR
AS A MAJOR EAST-WEST PEDESTRIAN
CONNECTION CORRIDOR TODAY AND
MAKE THAT EVEN A MORE
COMFORTABLE ENVIRONMENT AND
CREATE MORE SPACE FOR OUTDOOR
ACTIVITY, CURBSIDE COMMERCIAL
ACTIVITY, THINGS LIKE THAT AND
THEN REALLY A NUMBER
OF DIFFERENT CORRIDORS ARE
IDENTIFIED FOR PLACEMAKING
IMPROVEMENTS AND WAYFINDING
IMPROVEMENTS IN PARTICULAR
MAKING THE EXPERIENCE GOING
FROM A PARKING LOT OR A PARKING
GARAGE TO WHEREVER YOU'RE KIND
OF DESTINATION POINT IS
DOWNTOWN BE SOMETHING THAT HAS
MORE INTENTIONALITY AND MORE
COMFORT IN IT.
WE HEARD QUITE A BIT THAT, YOU
KNOW, PEOPLE ARE SUPPORTIVE
OF A LOT OF THE CHANGES THAT
HAVE BEEN MADE IN RECENT YEARS
DOWNTOWN AND AT THE SAME TIME
PEOPLE ALSO RECOGNIZE THAT
THERE'S A LOT OF PEOPLE THAT
ARE DRIVING DOWNTOWN.
THE GOOD NEWS IS, IS THAT THE
CITY HAS LOTS OF PARKING
GARAGES THAT ARE QUITE WELL
DISTRIBUTED THAT HAVE A LOT
OF CAPACITY IN THEM SO AS WE
LOOK TO MAKE OTHER IMPROVEMENTS
TO ENHANCE BICYCLES, TRANSIT
WALKING ENVIRONMENT DOWNTOWN
KIND OF CLARIFYING AND MAKING
THAT EXPERIENCE FOR PEOPLE THAT
DO RELY ON DRIVING TO GET
DOWNTOWN INTO PARK AND THEN TO
ALSO HAVE A POSITIVE EXPERIENCE
GETTING TO WHERE THEY WANT TO
GO IS AN IMPORTANT PART OF THE
EQUATION STILL.
OK, SO THAT WAS THE OLD KIND
OF A SUMMARY OF WHAT WAS
PRESENTED AT THE WORKSHOPS IN
OCTOBER .
I WANTED TO SPEND A FEW MINUTES
ON JUST AN ENGAGEMENT UPDATE
SUMMARIZING THE WORK TO DATE
AND THEN WHAT CAME OUT OF THE
OCTOBER WORKSHOPS AND THEN
WE'LL TOUCH ON SOME NEXT STEPS.
THE ITEMS THAT ARE IN ENGRAVED
EVERYTHING AT THE BOTTOM TWO
ITEMS ON THE LIST WERE THINGS
THAT WERE SHARED LAST TIME WE
MET WITH ALL OF YOU IN
OCTOBER AND THEN THE TWO SENSES
THAT DURING THE WE HAD THE
OCTOBER WORKSHOPS ABOUT A MONTH
AGO ON OCTOBER TWENTY THIRD AND
THEN AS PART OF THAT WORKSHOPS
THERE WERE ALSO A NUMBER
OF LEADERSHIP MEETINGS MET WITH
COUNCIL MEMBERS AND WITH THE
DDA BOARD DURING DURING THAT
WORKSHOP SESSION AS WELL I TO
BRING THEM UP TO SPEED ON THESE
RECOMMENDATIONS.
THE WORKSHOP WAS A DAYLONG OPEN
HOUSE FROM 11:00 A.M. UNTIL
7:00 AT NIGHT.
WE HAD TWO DIFFERENT PUBLIC
PRESENTATION TIMES DURING THE
NOON HOUR AND IN THE EVENING
AND IT'S JUST WORTH REMINDING
FOLKS TOO THAT THIS WORKSHOP IS
ACTUALLY THREE AND ONE SIMILAR
TO WHAT WAS DONE IN MARCH WHERE
WE WERE HAD ENGAGEMENT
ACTIVITIES FOR BOTH THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN ADIDAS
DEVELOPMENT PLAN THAT'S
UNDERWAY RIGHT NOW AS WELL AS
THE DOWNTOWN AREA CIRCULATION'S
SO IT'S REALLY AN OPPORTUNITY
TO BE ABLE TO TALK ACROSS ALL
OF THESE PLANNING EFFORTS THAT
ARE UNDERWAY.
WE HAD OVER TWO HUNDRED
ATTENDEES AT THE WORKSHOP OVER
THE COURSE OF THE DAY WHICH IS
A GREAT TURNOUT AGAIN THOSE TO
PUBLIC PRESENTATION TIMES YOU
CAN SEE ONE OF THOSE THAT WAS
GOING THIS WAS RECORDED AND IS
MADE AVAILABLE ONLINE AS WELL
SO PEOPLE COULD SEE A RECORDING
AFTERWARDS AND THE FULL SUITE
OF WORKSHOP ACTIVITIES WAS ALSO
REPLICATED IN AN ONLINE PORTAL.
SO ANYBODY THAT WASN'T ABLE TO
ATTEND A WORKSHOP IN PERSON
COULD GO ONLINE.
I LOG INTO THIS VIRTUAL YOU
DON'T HAVE TO LOG IN WITH JUST
A LINK TO FOLLOW BUT THEY COULD
GET ON A VIRTUAL WHITEBOARD
PAGE OR THEY COULD READ THE
SAME SET OF COMMENTS AND SEE
THE SAME ACTIVITIES AND
INFORMATION PRESENTED AS WAS
THE IN-PERSON WORKSHOP AND
THERE WERE A NUMBER OF BOARDS
THAT WERE DEVELOPED OUTLINING
ALL THE RECOMMENDATIONS THAT I
JUST WALK THROUGH.
I'M SPECIFIC FOR THE DOWNTOWN
AREA CIRCULATION STUDY AND THE
NATURE OF WHAT WE WERE ASKING
PEOPLE WAS REALLY TO SHARE
THEIR SORT OF REACTIONS AND
BROAD FEEDBACK ON THESE IDEAS
WITH THE UNDERSTANDING THAT
THIS IS A PLANNING STUDY BUT
THAT MANY OF THESE PROJECTS ARE
ABLE TO BE MOVED FORWARD IN THE
NEAR TERM.
AND SO OVERALL I THINK OUR
TAKEAWAY WAS THAT AS VERY
POSITIVE SURPRISINGLY POSITIVE
CONVERSATION BUILDING OFF
OF SOME OF THE MOMENTUM FROM
EARLIER IN THE YEAR WE DIDN'T
GET ANY SIGNIFICANT PUSHBACK ON
ANY OF THE IDEAS THAT WERE
BEING PROPOSED ON THE BOARDS.
MOST OF OUR CONVERSATIONS WITH
FOLKS WERE AROUND CLARIFYING
QUESTIONS, HELPING TO UNPACK
SOME OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS TO
MAKE IT CLEARER FOR FOLKS AND
JUST TO EXPAND ON SOME OF THOSE
CORE ENGAGEMENT TAKEAWAYS
AROUND SOME OF THE KEY TOPICS
ON THE BICYCLE PIECE CONTINUING
SUPPORT FOR THE LOW STRESS BIKE
NETWORK BIKE NETWORK
CONNECTIONS THE DOWNTOWN A LOT
OF INTEREST IN IMPROVING ACCESS
TO AND OVER THE BROADWAY BRIDGE
ON BIKE STANDPOINT CONNECTIONS
TO THE U OF A MEDICAL CAMPUS
AND REITERATING SUPPORT FOR
TRANSIT AND A DESIRE TO TRANSIT
INVESTMENTS REALLY ALIGNED WITH
KIND OF GROWTH AREAS BOTH IN
THE DOWNTOWN AND IN OUTLYING
PARTS OF THE CITY FROM A
PEDESTRIAN REALM STANDPOINT
CONTINUING TO BUILD ON WHAT WE
HEARD LAST TIME AROUND
AMENITIES AND ATTRACT A RANGE
OF PEOPLE WITH FAMILIES, PEOPLE
OF ALL DIFFERENT AGES, YOUNG
KIDS, OLDER FOLKS COMING
DOWNTOWN AND FEELING
COMFORTABLE AND FEELING THAT
THERE'S ACTIVITIES AND VIBRANCY
THERE FOR THEM TO PARTICIPATE
IN STRONG SUPPORT FOR A LOT
OF THE FLEXIBLE STREET AND
PLACEMAKING IDEAS AND THEN ON
THE STREET NETWORK CONTINUING
TO GET GOOD POSITIVE SUPPORT
REALLY ACROSS THE BOARD BOTH
FROM THE BUSINESS COMMUNITY AS
WELL AS THE PUBLIC AT LARGE FOR
A TWO WAY STREET RESTORATION
DESIRE FOR SAFER AND MORE
STREETS AND THAT WAYFINDING
ELEMENT FOR ALL MODES OF TRAVEL
TO HELP PEOPLE GET TO AND
THROUGH THE DOWNTOWN
COMFORTABLY.
SO LAST COUPLE OF SLIDES WHERE
ARE WE IN THE PROCESS KIND
OF WHAT'S WHAT'S COMING NEXT AS
WE PUT TOGETHER THE FINAL
REPORT DRAFT AFTER THE
CIRCULATION STUDY WE ARE GOING
THROUGH A LOT OF THE
RECOMMENDATIONS AND PUTTING
KIND OF CONCEPTS TOGETHER,
PUTTING TOGETHER AN
UNDERSTANDING OF WHAT PROJECT
COSTS ARE AND HOW THAT MIGHT
FEED INTO THE SIPI CAPITAL
IMPROVEMENT PLANNING PROCESS
AND PART OF THAT IS GETTING A
SENSE OF WHAT ARE SOME OF THE
IMPLEMENTATION TIME FRAMES FOR
THESE DIFFERENT PROJECTS AND A
NUMBER HAVE BEEN IDENTIFIED AS
NEAR-TERM OPPORTUNITIES THAT
ACTION CAN BE TAKEN WITHIN THE
NEXT YEAR.
THAT INCLUDES THE MILLER STREET
BIKEWAY DESIGN IS CLOSE TO
BEING FINALIZED.
I BELIEVE THAT CONSTRUCTION IS
ANTICIPATED NEXT YEAR.
WASHINGTON STREET BIKE
BOULEVARD WILL GO INTO KIND
OF A PROPER DESIGN AND
ENGINEERING PHASE NEXT YEAR.
THE ALWAYS STOP CONVERSIONS WE
JUST MET EARLIER THIS WEEK WITH
TRANSPORTATION STAFF TALKING
ABOUT THE ROLLOUT OF THAT WHICH
COULD TAKE PLACE IN THE COMING
MONTHS AND THE DETAILS AS
THEY'RE MAKING PROGRAM AND A
NUMBER OF PRIORITIES AND
PROJECTS FOR TWENTY TWENTY FIVE
AND THEN YOU CAN SEE THE OTHER
MAJOR PROJECTS IDENTIFIED IN
THIS WORK THAT ARE LISTED AS
KIND FUTURE OPPORTUNITIES THAT
NEED TO BE CLARIFIED IN THE
COMING MONTHS BARAS HOW THOSE
WILL GET IMPLEMENTED FORWARD.
>> SO EXTENSION OF THE DIVISION
THREE BIKEWAY BIKEWAY ONE
OF THE TRANSIT IMPROVEMENTS ARE
GOING TO RELY HEAVILY ON THE
RIGHT FOR THEIR LONG RANGE
PLANNING FOR WHEN THEY SEE
THOSE PIECES BEING IMPLEMENTED.
BUT WE CAN START TO PLAN TO
THOSE IN RESERVE SPACE FOR
THOSE MOVING FORWARD.
>> SO WITH THAT LAST SLIDE IS
LOOKING AT JUST WHERE WE ARE
AND THE REPORT WRITING PHASE
OVER THE NEXT MONTH WE'LL BE
FINALIZING KIND OF A DRAFT FOR
INTERNAL REVIEW AND WE WOULD
ANTICIPATE EARLY NEXT YEAR THAT
A DRAFT REPORT WOULD GET
CIRCULATED FOR PUBLIC REVIEW
INCLUDING COMING BACK TO THE
TRANSPORT COMMISSION AND
ULTIMATELY KIND OF THE PLAN
RECOMMENDATIONS CAN BE
FINALIZED WITH AN UNDERSTANDING
OF TIMEFRAME FOR IMPLEMENTATION
ALONGSIDE ADOPTION OF THE
NARBERTH COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND
ALSO THE EDA'S DEVELOPMENT PLAN
THAT ARE BOTH CONDUITS FOR
TEEING UP FUNDING AND CAPITAL
SUPPORT FOR MANY OF THESE
PROJECTS.
>> SO WE'VE HAD A LOT TO
COVER IF WE CAN TAKE SOME TIME
FOR QUESTIONS IF THAT MAKES
SENSE.
YEAH.
THANK YOU SO MUCH.
ALL OF OUR QUESTIONS OR
COMMENTS FROM ANYBODY I KNOW IS
THAT MOST OF THIS LAST MONTH SO
THERE'S NOT A LOT THAT'S NEW
BUT ANY COMMENTS OR QUESTIONS
?
IF NOT I THANK YOU AGAIN.
APPRECIATE GETTING AN UPDATE
AND DEFINITELY LOOK FORWARD TO
THE FINAL THE FINAL STUDY
REPORT DUE EARLY NEXT YEAR.
BUT BUT EVEN MORE SO TO START
SEEING THESE NEAR-TERM PROJECTS
BREAK GROUND AND THEN START
BEING IMPLEMENTED AND FOR THE
LONG TERM STUFF TO HOPEFULLY
GET INTO THE CFP PLANS GOING
FORWARD.
ALL RIGHT.
WELL WITH THAT THEN LET'S MOVE
ON AGAIN.
THANK YOU.
NEXT UP IS THE STACK REPORT AND
UPDATES WE SHOULD HAVE GOTTEN A
STAFF REPORT PROVIDING UPDATES
WITH OUR AGENDA MATERIALS.
>> SO LOOK, IF YOU WANT TO GO
THROUGH THAT THANK YOU.
>> SHARING SCREEN HERE WAS THE
THE FILE WITH SOME HIGHLIGHTS
FOR TARGET TWENTY FOR
CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS STREETS
RESURFACING PROJECT
CONSTRUCTION WORK IS
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETE AND OUR
STREETS ARE NOW OPEN TO TRAFFIC
FOR SIDEWALK GAP FILLING
PROJECT ALL TWENTY TWENTY FOUR
PROJECTS THAT ARE NOW COMPLETE
THEN AS THE LAST CONVERSATION
OUT OF OUR MISSION FOR MYNOR
AVENUE IMPROVEMENT THIS IS THE
SAME PROJECT LATEST UPDATE IT
WAS FROM EARLIER THIS WEEK.
THE CONSTRUCTION CONTRACT WAS
APPROVED BY CITY COUNCIL AND
CONSTRUCTION IS EXPECTED TO
START IN THE SPRING OF TWENTY
TWENTY FIVE IN THE NEXT GROUP
OF PROJECTS THAT ARE CURRENTLY
IN DESIGN AND THE PLANNING THE
FIRST ONE IS SOUTH MAIN STREET
SIDEWALK GARBERVILLE PROJECT.
THIS ONE WILL CONSTRUCT A NEW
SIDEWALK ALONG THE EAST SIDE
OF SOUTH MAIN STREET BETWEEN
STADIUM BOULEVARD AND UNOBVIOUS
ON THE ROAD THE DESIGN IS NOW
MOSTLY COMPLETE AND THE
CONSTRUCTION IS CURRENTLY
ANTICIPATED FOR 2095 AND STAFF
IS WORKING ON HEASMAN
ACQUISITION THAT TO THE NEXT
PAGE.
SO I'M HAVING COMPARING NOTES
FROM LAST MONTH TO THIS MONTH
FOR OTHER SIDEWALK APP FAIL
PROJECT THAT ARE IN DESIGN THIS
MONTH WE'RE SHOWING A NEW AREA
THAT'S IN THE APPLE AND PEAR
AREA.
>> THIS ONE INCLUDES FITTING
VARIOUS SIDEWALK APPS AT THE
LOCATIONS BELOW THE THREE
LOCATIONS APPLE STREET BETWEEN
PONTIAC PEAR AND PEAR STREET
FROM JOHN EDWARDS TO TREVER AND
JOHN EDWARDS FROM PONTIAC TO A
PAIR CURRENTLY THE DESIGN IS
JUST THE BEGINNING AND THERE
WILL BE MORE INFORMATION
PROVIDED THAT IS AVAILABLE.
>> THE NEXT DESIGN PROJECT IS
ALONG SASTRY.
IT'S A SEGMENT FROM WILLIAM TO
SOUTH UNIVERSITY.
THIS ONE WILL INCLUDE TRANSIT
ONLY LANE IN THE NORTHBOUND
DIRECTION OF STATE STREET STAFF
AND THE CONSULTING TEAM IS
CURRENTLY WORKING ON THE DESIGN
AND CONSTRUCTION WILL BE IN
TWENTY TWENTY FIVE IN THE SAME
VICINITY AROUND THE UNIVERSITY
FROM STATE TO FLETCHER DESIGN
IS UNDERWAY AND THERE WILL BE
MORE INFORMATION TO BE SHARED.
WAITZ AVAILABLE CONSTRUCTION
FOR THIS STRETCH OF NORTH
UNIVERSITY IS EXPECTED TO BE IN
2026.
MOVING ON TO TALK ABOUT NIXON
ROAD RECONSTRUCTION.
THIS PRODUCT WAS DESIGNED
SEVERAL YEARS AGO AND THE FIRST
PHASE OF THE CONSTRUCTION IS
GOING TO START IN 2025.
THE SCOPE OF THE WORK INCLUDES
A WATER MAIN SANITARY AND STORM
SEWER WORK THE INSTALLATION
OF BOTH OF OUR SEGMENTS IN THE
ROADWAY.
THERE WILL BE SEVERAL AROUND
THE ROUNDABOUTS AND THE BICYCLE
AND THE PEDESTRIAN IMPROVEMENTS
PROJECT PLANS ARE CURRENTLY
BEING UPDATED SINCE IT'S BEEN A
COUPLE OF YEARS OLD AND THERE
WILL BE EASEMENT THAT ARE IN
THE PROCESS OF BEING ACQUIRED
INFORMATIONAL VIDEO FOR THE
TITLE AND THE WHO AND THE
DOCUMENT IS AVAILABLE ON THE
PROJECT WEB PAGE AND THE
CONSTRUCTION IS EXPECTED TO
START IN THE SPRING OF TWENTY
TWENTY FIVE AND IT'S GOING TO
LAST THROUGH A TWENTY TWENTY
SIX ON THE NEXT PAGE WE HAVE
THE FIRST ONE THAT'S TWENTY
TWENTY FIVE MISCELLANEOUS
UTILITY PROJECT.
THIS ONE COVERS A VARIETY
OF LOCATIONS THROUGHOUT THE
CITY THAT ARE THREE STREETS
GLASTONBURY WELDEN IN THE
VATICAN NEIGHBORHOOD AND THEN
THERE WILL BE ANOTHER SHORT
STRETCH ALONG HARDING THAT'S
NOT FAR AWAY FROM PAPPE AND
MIDDLE SCHOOL.
THEN THERE'S ALSO A SEGMENT
OF FIFTH AVENUE IN A PACKARD
AND JEFFERSON AREA SO INTO THE
HOLIDAY UPDATE AND THIS PROJECT
STAFF HOSTING A NEIGHBORHOOD
MEETING REGARDING HARTING THAT
WAS LACKING LAST WEEK AND WE
RECEIVED VERY WELL ATTENDED
MEETING.
THERE WERE MANY ATTENDANCE
AROUND THE NEIGHBORHOOD AND WE
STOPPED RECEIVE THE BOTH
SUPPORT AND COMMENT REGARDING
THE PROPOSED CHANGE TO THE
INTERSECTION OF HEARTING AND
THE WAITING WORD AND ITS STAFF
IS SUMMARIZING THOSE COMMENTS.
I WILL BE POSTING THE THE
LATEST UPDATE ON THE PROJECT
WEBSITE AND WE COVERED THAT
GREAT DETAIL ABOUT THE
SPECULATION STUDY KNOWN WE ARE
ON TO TALKING ABOUT OTHER
UPDATES ON THE INFORMATION
FOR
AND THAT'S MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT
OF TRANSPORTATION AND
COORDINATION.
I'M NOT HAS BEEN WORKING ON THE
U.S. TWENTY THREE IMPROVEMENT
PROJECTS AND THERE WAS AN OPEN
HOUSE HOUSE.
IT WAS HELD OCTOBER 21ST AT
WASHTENAW COMMUNITY COLLEGE.
>> WE ON TO TALK ABOUT ANOTHER
PROJECT WITH THE UNIVERSITY.
IT'S THE UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
SMARTENING SECTIONS PROJECT.
>> THE UNIVERSITY HAS BEEN
WORKING IN THE CONNECTED
VEHICLE WORLD FOR ABOUT LONGER
THAN A DECADE.
THIS IS THE LATEST DEPLOYMENT
AND THERE THAT DIRECTION IN
THIS PROJECT THERE ARE A TOTAL
OF TWENTY ONE INTERSECTION
INCLUDING AND THE MAJORITY
OF THE SITES ARE LOCATED ALONG
HOUSE WORTH BOLER MAPO AND THE
WEST STADIUM FOR THE
INSTALLATION IT HAS STARTED IN
THE FALL OF THIS YEAR AND THE
FIRST APPLICATION FROM THIS
WORK WILL BE TRANSIT SIGNAL
PRIORITY.
SO THIS WILL BE CONNECTED
VEHICLE TECHNOLOGY BASED
TRANSIT SIGNAL PRIORITY THAT'S
A LITTLE DIFFERENT FROM THE
PRESENTATION I JUST HEARD FROM
OUT OF HER ABOUT OTHER SIGNAL
TRANSFER SIGNAL PRIORITY ON
STATE STREET THEN THIS PROJECT
PLAN WELL THE UNIVERSITY TEAM
THEY ARE PLANNING ON COMING
INTO THIS COMMISSION NEXT MONTH
TO PRESENT THAT UPDATE AS TO
THE CHANGES BEING PROPOSED TO
THE SYSTEM AND THE APPLICATIONS
FOR STREET LIGHT WORK UP TO
THIS POINT IN THIS CALENDAR
YEAR, BECKY HAS REPORTED FIXING
TEN THOUSAND SIXTY TWO
STREETLIGHTS AND MOVING ON TO
NEIGHBORHOOD TRAFFIC CALMING
PROGRAM.
SO THE FIRST LIST IS APPROVED
TRAFFIC CALMING PROJECTS THAT
HAVE BEEN CONSTRUCTED OR IS
BEING SCHEDULED FOR
CONSTRUCTION AND THE NEXT
BUCKET IS PETITION'S.
THE CITY HAS RECEIVED AND THE
HARAGA THREE AND THAT'S THE
FIRST THREE IN THE QUEUE ARE
THE ONES THE CITY HAS STARTED
WORKING ON THE EVALUATION
OF THE PETITION AND FOR BIKE
PARKING OR OUR PILOT PROGRAM
PARTICIPANTS HAVE BEEN SENT A
REMINDER FOR THE LIMITING
MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS OF THE
PROGRAM AND THIS PROGRAM WILL
GO THROUGH EVALUATION IN THE
SPRING OF TWENTY TWENTY FIVE.
>> THE NEXT ONE IS SAFE STREET
FOR ALL.
GRANT CITY HAS SO THERE ARE TWO
MAIN PILLARS UNDER THIS ONE.
THE FIRST ONE IS THE NEAR MISS
AND THEN IT PASK AND CITY HAS
PUBLISHED A REQUEST FOR
PROPOSAL FOR THE PROCUREMENT
OF THE NEAR MISS AND THE SYSTEM
AND ONCE WE HAVE PROPOSALS FOR
STARTING EVALUATION AND SELECT
A VENDOR FOR THAT.
THE SECOND PILLAR IS QUICK
BUILD AND SPEED.
THE MANAGEMENT AND STAFF AND
THE CONSULTANT IS A WORK IS
CURRENTLY WORKING ON PROJECT
SITE SELECTION PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT PLAN AND NEPA
PACKAGE.
NIKPAI IS THE ENVIRONMENTAL
CLEARANCE STEP THAT HAS TO BE
CLEARED BEFORE THE LOCATIONS
ARE FINALIZED AND CLEARED FOR
CONSTRUCTION FOR EDUCATION AND
THE ENCOURAGEMENT WE HAVE
SCHEDULED THE BIKE TO WHEREVER
THEY AND THAT'S GOING TO BE THE
MAY 14TH IN TWENTY TWENTY FIVE
IN THE CITY OVER THE LAST MONTH
STAFF HAS APPLIED FOR TWO
GRANTS TO ALL CATEGORIES.
THE FIRST ONE IS SEMAK THAT
STANDS FOR CONGESTION
MITIGATION AIR QUALITY.
THE CALL FOR PROJECT IS FOR THE
FISCAL YEAR TWENTY TWENTY SEVEN
THROUGH TWENTY TWENTY NINE AND
WE SUBMITTED TO APPLICATIONS
AND THEREFORE THE CONSTRUCTION
OF ROUNDABOUT'S AT TWO
INTERSECTIONS.
BOTH INTERSECTIONS ARE ALONG A
TRAIL.
THE FIRST ONE IS DUBAH AND OUT
TRAIL AND THE SECOND ONE IS
MORE IN THE LONG SHORE AT METRO
THE SECOND PROGRAM'S STAFF
SENDING APPLICATIONS FOR OUR
THE CARBON REDUCTION PROGRAM IS
FOR THE SAME TIME FRAME FISCAL
YEAR TWENTY SEVEN THROUGH
TWENTY NINE STAFF SUBMITTED
THROUGH APPLICATIONS.
THEY INCLUDE THE VISION BIKE
LANE EXTENSION THAT IS THE
LOCATION IS TO THE NORTH
OF KINGSLEE AND THE EXTENT
THROUGH THE JUNCTION AT
BROADWAY BEEKS DIVISION KERRY
AND SUMMIT SO AND THAT IS PART
OF THE THE RECOMMENDATION FROM
THE DOWNTOWN AREA LIQUIDATION
STUDY.
THE SECOND LOCATION STAFF
APPLIED THE GRANT FOUR IS
BROADWAY AND MADE AND MORE THAT
INTERSECTION AND THIS
INTERSECTION IS EXPECTED TO BE
CONSTRUCTED SIMULTANEOUSLY WITH
THE THE ROUNDABOUT AT MORE
LONGSHORE AND PONTIAC TRAIL.
THE THIRD APPLICATION WAS FOR
THE AREA SURROUNDED BY GLEN
AVENUE AND STREET SCENE THAT
PICTURE AND THE CATHERINE THERE
ARE OF FROM A VARIETY OF OF
ANGLES WE HAVE CLEAR LOCATIONS
IN THIS AREA.
WE HAVE WE'RE EXPECTING WE
ALREADY HAVE THE HOTEL
DEVELOPMENT, THE CANAL HOTEL
AND ALWAYS CALLED THE VANGUARD
AND THERE WILL BE ADDITIONAL
PARKING ADDITIONS ON THE
UNIVERSITY CAMPUS AND ALSO THE
DOWNTOWN AREA LIQUIDATION STUDY
IS PROPOSING BIKEWAY EXTENSION
ALONG CATHERINES SO THIS AREA
DOES REPRESENT THE CONFLUENCE
OF SEVERAL PROJECTS AND THIS
GRANT WILL SUPPORT THE
EVALUATION AND DEPLOYMENT
OF MITIGATION MEASURES TO BE
IDENTIFIED IN THE FUTURE
MILLION TO TALK ABOUT THE
CONVERSION OF FLASHING YELLOW
ARROW TO ENABLE THE PEDESTRIAN
CAR TO CANCEL FLASHIN ALL
HARRILL THIS IS THE FIRST TIME
WE ARE REPORTING WE DID NOT
CONVERT ANY IN OCTOBER WE WERE
WORKING.
THERE ARE A COUPLE LOCATIONS ON
OUR ELSWORTH AND ST. SCHOOL
THAT HAD SOME MINOR ISSUES FROM
THE PREVIOUS MONTH.
WE'RE WORKING ON THAT ONE AND
WE DID NOT ADD ANY NEW LOCATION
TO THIS LIST.
WE DO WE EXPECT WILL CONTINUE
AND THE SHIFT MORE LOCATION IS
FROM THE SECOND GROUP.
THAT'S WHERE IT DOES NOT CANCEL
THE ARROW AND MAKE THE
CONVERSION.
SO THEY JOINED THE THE FIRST
GROUP AS THE IMPROVEMENT.
SO THAT'S MOST OF THE THE
CAPITAL PROJECT UPDATE AND NEXT
I'LL PRESENT TRAFFIC CRASH DATA
FROM SEPTEMBER AND OCTOBER IN
THE MONTH OF SEPTEMBER THERE
WERE A TOTAL OF SIX REPORTED
PEDESTRIAN CRASHES.
THERE WERE FOUR BLACKWILL
INJURIES AS A RESULT OF THOSE
CRASHES THERE IS ONE THAT
OCCURRED AT A MAIN STREET IN
WASHINGTON.
>> THIS ONE THE LEVEL INJURIES
THIS GET A C AND SO IT'S NOT
REALLY CLEAR.
>> WE LOOKED INTO THE CRASH
REPORT AND IT TURNS OUT TO BE
THERE WAS NOT I GUESS NONE
OF THE PARTIES INVOLVED WERE
LIKE GUYS DISPATCHED TO THE
HOSPITAL.
SO THESE LEVEL INJURIES MAY GET
REVISED LATER ON AND THAT CRASH
OCCURRED BETWEEN THE MOTORIZED
BICYCLE CAB IN TOWN AND
PEDESTRIANS SO AT THAT TIME
MAIN STREET SOUTH OF WASHINGTON
WAS CLOSED OFF BY A BARRICADE
AND THE THE PEDICAB RAN INTO
THE BARRICADE AND INTO TWO
PEDESTRIANS AND IN THE MONTH
OF SEPTEMBER THERE WERE A TOTAL
OF SIX BICYCLE LESS INVOLVED
CRASHES AND THEY WERE ALL B
LEVEL INJURIES.
AND FOR THE MONTH OF OCTOBER
THERE WERE TEN PEDESTRIANS
INVOLVED CRASHES THERE WAS ONE
ANOTHER INJURY AT PATTERN AN
ARCH AND FOUR BELOW INJURIES
THREE INJURIES AND THERE ARE
TWO THAT ARE PROPERTY DAMAGE
ONLY FOUR BICYCLE CRASHES.
THERE WERE NINE IN TOTAL IN
OCTOBER .
TWO ARE BELOW INJURY ONE SEA
LEVEL INJURY, THREE PROPERTY
DAMAGE ONLY AND THE OTHER THREE
THOUGH NO INJURIES ARE NOT
IDENTIFIED AT THIS POINT.
SO THAT WRAPS UP MY REPORT AND
PASSING BACK TO THE CHAIR.
>> THANK YOU.
LOOK, ARE THERE ANY QUESTIONS I
GOT I SAID A QUICK QUESTION
ABOUT MILLER AVENUE SINCE
THAT'S SUCH A LONG I'VE JUST
RECEIVED A QUESTION FROM A
CONSTITUENT REGARDING SORT
OF CONSTRUCTION CYCLE ALREADY
AND I'M CURIOUS IS THERE ANY
SENSE OF WHETHER THIS PROJECT
WILL BE IN CONSTRUCTION WILL BE
HAPPENING OVER THE ENTIRE SORT
OF LENGTH THE QUARTER OR WILL
BE WILL IT BE STAGED, YOU KNOW,
WHERE MIGHT MIGHT BE WORKING UP
TO SEVEN STRAIGHT AND THEN
SEVENTH STREET?
I DON'T KNOW.
I'M JUST CURIOUS IF THERE'S ANY
ANY SENSE OF HOW THAT PROJECT
MIGHT BE STAGED AT THIS POINT I
CAN TRY TO FEEL THAT I I'M NOT
100 PERCENT SURE BUT I THINK
THE PLAN IS TO STAGE IT IN TWO
PIECES.
>> THAT'S WHAT I DON'T I DON'T
BELIEVE WE'RE GOING TO HAVE THE
WHOLE THING CLOSED.
BUT THERE THERE MIGHT BE
INFORMATION ON THAT ON THE
WEBSITE IF NOT, WE'LL LOOK TO
GET THAT UPDATED.
GOOD.
I KNOW WE STILL JUST CARRY
THANK YOU, PETE
, YOU SAID THAT
THE THE ENTRY LEVEL FOR SOME
OF THE PEDESTRIAN CRASHES IS
LISTED AS AN A IS THAT IS THAT
WE DON'T KNOW IT YET OR THE
REPORTS NOT FINALIZED OR WHAT'S
THE LIKELIHOOD THAT WE'RE GOING
TO GET FILLED IN OR REVISED AT
THIS POINT WE WE DON'T KNOW
YET.
THEY ARE FAIRLY RECENT.
SO I THINK THIS IS WHERE SOME
OF THE COLLEAGUES MAYBE TEND TO
MAKE SURE WE CAN TRY AND HELP
ME OUT AS WELL AS TO THE TIMING
OF WHEN THESE WILL BE I GUESS
FINALIZE OR GET UPDATED ON THE
CRASH REPORT.
THE TYPICALLY THE REPORT SHOULD
BE DONE THE SAME DAY THAT
INCIDENT OCCURS.
OCCASIONALLY YOU CAN GET HELD
OUT FOR A LITTLE BIT LONGER AND
THOSE CRASHES THAT ARE OF A
SERIOUS NATURE LIKE WHERE OUR
ADVANCED TEAMS CALLED OUT THOSE
CAN GET HELD OUT FOR SOMETIMES
WEEKS.
BUT THE NATURE OF THE INJURIES
ON THE ONES THAT THAT LUKE HAD
UP THERE THOUGH SHOULD NOT BE
HELD.
I DON'T BELIEVE SO.
LUKE, IF YOU CAN SAY ME THAT
SLIDE, I CAN PULL THOSE
INDIVIDUAL REPORTS AND THEN
FOLLOW UP ON THEM AND GET
INFORMATION TO PETE AND WOULD
BE HERE.
EXCELLENT.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
ALL RIGHT.
THANK YOU.
THERE'S NO MORE QUESTIONS AS
MOVE ON TO AS OUR REPORTS.
SO ANY COMMISSIONERS WHO SERVE
AS A LIAISON TO ANOTHER BODY OR
ORGANIZATION OR BUDDED NOW TO
PROVIDE A REPORT OR UPDATE
SEEING NONE OF LET'S MOVE ON TO
COMMISSION MEMBER
COMMUNICATIONS.
THIS IS JUST FREE TIME FOR ANY
COMMISSIONERS TO PROVIDE ANY
REPORTS OR UPDATES THEY SO
DESIRE.
ERIKA, THANKS.
ALREADY HEARD ABOUT CITY
COUNCIL PROVIDING A PROVISION
ANOTHER AVENUE PROJECT ALSO WAS
APPROVED ON MONDAY NIGHT WAS
UPDATES TO OUR ORDINANCE AROUND
CLARIFYING WHERE CARTS CAN BE
TRASH RECYCLING CAN BE IN THE
ADJACENT TO BIKE LANES THINGS
LIKE THAT.
SO HOPEFULLY OUR GOAL IS TO GET
THEM OUT OF THE BIKE LANES AND
THAT'S BEEN VERIFIED WHILE I
WENT THROUGH FIRST READING
IT'LL GO TO SECOND READING IN A
MONTH OR SO.
THANK YOU.
YEAH THANK YOU.
UM I WAS THINKING IF WOULD BE
RELEVANT TO THIS BODY JUST TWO
THINGS FROM PLANNING COMMISSION
YESTERDAY WAS THE PARTY MOVING
FORWARD ON MAPLE FOR AVALON
HOUSING ANOTHER THIRTY NINE
UNITS IT'LL BE TWENTY PARKING
SPOTS ONE POINT FIVE PER UNITS.
JUST WANT TO GIVE A QUICK HEADS
UP ON THAT BUT IT'LL BE A SIXTY
PERCENT IN THERE AND ALSO I
THINK THIRTY PERCENT AS WELL.
SO THAT'S GOING TO MOVE
FORWARD.
I THINK THAT'S ADVANCING CITY
COUNCIL NEXT AND I THINK THEY
HAVE A TIGHT TIMELINE BUT
OVERALL THEY SAID THAT THE
PARKING REQUIREMENT COMING FROM
MR. JUST WANTED TO MAKE SURE
THEY WERE COMPLYING.
THE OTHER THING THAT WE TALKED
ABOUT WAS A HOME OCCUPATION AND
SEIU WHICH HAS TO DO WITH THE
ACCESSORY COMMERCIAL USE AND
IT'S TO ADDRESS FOLKS THAT ARE
RUNNING SOME TYPE OF SMALLER
COMMERCE OUT OF THEIR HOMES AND
A LOT OF THAT HAS TO DO WITH
THE LEVEL OF TRAFFIC THAT'S
GENERATED TOWARDS THEIR SPACE
AND WHAT'S THE APPROPRIATE KIND
OF LIMITATIONS RESTRICTIONS.
SO THERE WAS A PRETTY BIG STUDY
AT THE PLANNING DEPARTMENT PUT
TOGETHER FOR I THINK OUR ZONING
CURRENTLY RESTRICTED TO TWENTY
FOUR VISITORS PER DAY OR
SOMETHING ALONG THOSE LINES.
AND SO WE WERE TRYING TO GET A
SENSE OF LIKE AT WHAT POINT
DOES IT BECOME A NUISANCE WHEN
YOU HAVE REPEATED TRAVEL IN
RESIDENTIAL ZONES AT THE SAME
TIME THERE'S LIKE AN
ENCOURAGEMENT OF 15 MINUTE
NEIGHBORHOODS WHERE YOU HAVE
CUTE CAFES, SHOPS OR SOMETHING
ALONG THOSE LINES YOU KNOW,
WITHIN OR A DAYCARE.
SO KIND OF AN INTERESTING TRADE
OFF THAT WE WERE TALKING ABOUT.
I DON'T KNOW THAT THERE'S AND I
THINK IT'S ACTUALLY THE REPORT
THAT'S BEEN COMPILED IS GOING
TO GO BACK CITY COUNCIL FOR
SOME DIRECTION BUT
PREDOMINANTLY A LOT OF WHAT WE
HAD HEARD WAS SIMPLY FROM THE
STANDPOINT OF A LOT OF PEOPLE
COMPLAIN ABOUT TRAFFIC
GENERATION COMING FROM THOSE
THINGS IF THERE IS TOO MUCH
TRAFFIC IN A RESIDENTIAL ZONE.
SO I THINK THEY MENTIONED SELMA
CAFE AS BEING ONE OF THE
EXAMPLES OF ONES THAT HAD
STARTED TO CAUSE SOME PROBLEMS
AND ISSUES FROM THE TRAFFIC
SIDE OF THINGS, ESPECIALLY
BEING NEXT TO AN ELEMENTARY
SCHOOL.
BUT WE'VE BEEN THINKING ABOUT
IT.
WE THINK THAT IT'S PROBABLY OUR
THOUGHT PROCESS WAS WE WANT TO
HELP REDUCE BARRIER TO ENTRY
FOR ENTREPRENEURS THAT WANT TO
DO PROOF OF CONCEPT.
BUT AT THE SAME TIME WE NEED TO
ALSO GO THROUGH A COMPREHENSIVE
PLANNING PROCESS WHICH IS
UNDERWAY.
AND SO WE WERE WONDERING DO WE
MAKE THE REVISIONS NOW OR DO WE
LET THE PLAN OR THE COMP PLAN
KIND OF PROCESS PLAY OUT BUT
JUST WANTED TO BRING THIS TO
SPECIFIC ITEMS UP FOR YOUR
AWARENESS AS OF YESTERDAY.
>> SO THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
RIGHT.
AND IT'S A FUTURE AGENDA ITEMS
.
>> DID YOU WANT TO GO THROUGH
THE LIST?
YES, I CERTAINLY CAN.
NEXT MONTH WE'LL BE LOOKING AT
THE NEXT CALENDAR YEAR TWENTY
TWENTY FIVE THE COMMISSION
MEETING SCHEDULE IN THE WORK
PLAN AND AS I MENTIONED EARLIER
,WE'LL BE HAVING A GUEST
COMING FROM THE UNIVERSITY
OF MICHIGAN TRANSPORTATION
RESEARCH INSTITUTE TO PRESENT
THE ON THEIR WORK IN THE
CONNECTED VEHICLE WORLD AND
OTHER POTENTIAL ITEMS FOR NEXT
MONTH OR FUTURE MONTH INCLUDE
BOTH LANE STREET THE
RECONFIGURATION SAFE STREET FOR
ALL PROJECT UPDATE NEXT YEAR'S
CAPITAL PROJECT LIST TRAFFIC
CALMING EDYTA PARKING CURBSIDE
USE STUDY.
SO THOSE ARE THE POTENTIAL
ITEMS I KNOW IT'S IT'S ON OUR
EXCEL SPREADSHEET BUT I WANTED
TO MAKE SURE WE TALK ABOUT IT
HERE MENTIONED IT HERE MAYBE
PUT THIS PUT IT IN HERE FOR
FUTURE MEETINGS IS A MEETING
WHERE WE FOCUS ON SCHOOL ISSUES
,FUTURE SITE PLANS THAT HAVE
BEEN BANDIED ABOUT THE TOOL KIT
FOR THE SCHOOL AREA, TRAFFIC
CALMING OTHER OTHER SUCH DROP
OFF ISSUES, THOSE SORTS
OF THINGS.
YEAH, WE TALKED ABOUT THAT ARE
AGENDA SETTING MEETING IN THE
PAST.
WANT TO MAKE SURE IT'S
EVERYBODY KNOWS THAT IT'S
SOMETHING WE'RE TRYING TO GET
ORGANIZED OR I WAS JUST GOING
TO TAG ON TO THAT.
>> I NOTICED IN THE PACKET
TODAY THAT THERE IS SOME
CONCERNS FROM A CONSTITUENT
ABOUT COORDINATION BETWEEN THE
IN OUR PUBLIC SCHOOLS
REPRESENTATIVE IN THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION AND I
WASN'T JUST I WAS JUST NOT SURE
AS A NEWCOMER TO THOSE DOES
THAT COORDINATION HAPPEN AT A
DIFFERENT MEETING?
IS THAT SOMETHING THAT WE ARE
TRYING TO COORDINATE WITH
PUBLIC SCHOOLS BECAUSE I KNOW
THERE'S SIGNIFICANT
INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS ONGOING
TO GET THE PUBLIC SCHOOLS THAT
WOULD DEFINITELY IMPACT SOME
OF OUR PLANS IN THE CITY AND
TYPICALLY THERE ARE THIS IS NOT
THE ONLY FORUM FOR THAT TO
HAPPEN FOR
WE WOULD GET
OPINIONS FROM ABOUT SCORES AND
THE VICE VERSA SO BUT WE WEAR
ARE TRYING TO MALWARE STUFF IS
DOING SOME TOUCH WITH WAS
SCHOOL WAS PROBABLY SCHOOLS
TRYING TO I GUESS EXPLORE
WHAT'S THE PAST A FORUM THE
FORMAT TO LOOK AT THE BROADER
PLATFORM SO WE CAN ALL DISCUSS
THE COMMON TOPICS AT ONCE.
>> YEAH THERE THERE IS A CITY
SCHOOL TRAFFIC SAFETY KIND
OF MEETING.
IT'S BEEN DORMANT I THINK FOR A
WHILE MAYBE A COUPLE OF YEARS
NOW BUT THAT WAS A REGULAR
OCCURRENCE, RIGHT?
YES, IT WAS.
SO THAT JUST PART OF THAT PART
OF THAT WHOLE TOPIC ERICA
.
>> YEAH.
ON THAT LATTER POINT I I'VE
BEEN ON COUNCIL FOR FOUR YEARS
AND ASSIGNED TO IT AND IT HAS
NOT MET DURING MY TIME ON
COUNCIL YET SO I DO THINK WE
HAVE A BIT OF AN ISSUE IN TERMS
OF THAT THIS AND OTHER STAFF TO
STAFF COMMUNICATION BETWEEN
SCHOOLS IN THE CITY.
BUT I THINK WE NEED TO FIGURE
OUT A WAY TO HAVE THIS MORE YOU
KNOW, OTHER TYPES
OF CONVERSATIONS AS WELL.
ALSO THINK THAT THERE'S A REAL
INTEREST FROM THE COMMUNITY AND
FROM THE COMMISSION TO TO HAVE
THAT CONVERSATION AROUND SITE
DESIGN AND HOW THOSE HOW THOSE
SCHOOL PLANS MIGHT IMPACT
ADJACENT SURROUNDING
NEIGHBORHOODS AND WHAT THE
IMPACTS OF OTHER SITE PLANS
MIGHT BE TRANSPORTATION.
ALSO ANOTHER PLUG FOR THAT AND
THEN A POSSIBLE ISSUE THAT
MIGHT BE WORTH HAVING A
CONVERSATION ABOUT AS WELL
COULD HAVE MENTIONED THIS
COMMISSION UPDATES WAS IN OUR
COUNCIL'S MOST RECENT WORK
SESSION.
THERE IS CONVERSATION AROUND
ARBER S AND THE DEVELOPMENT
THAT'LL BE ON AS PROPOSED FOR
SOUTH STATE STREET AND THAT
PROPOSES YOU HAVE A THREE
PARKING GARAGES.
THE POINT THAT WOULD BE
OF INTEREST TO THIS COMMISSION
POTENTIALLY IS THE DISCUSSION
OF THE CITY SETTING UP A
SEPARATE PARKING AUTHORITY AS
WELL.
SO SOMETHING IN ADDITION TO THE
DDA OBVIOUSLY COVERS THE
DOWNTOWN AREA TO MANAGE PARKING
STRUCTURES THAT WOULD BE
FINANCED BY THE CITY FOR
PRIVATE DEVELOPMENT WE WOULD
NEED TO SET UP A PARKING
AUTHORITY AND SO THAT MIGHT BE
SOMETHING OF INTEREST.
I'M ACTUALLY NOT ENTIRELY SURE
WHEN THIS MIGHT COME BACK TO
COUNCIL SO I DON'T KNOW IF
THERE'S AN OPPORTUNITY TO HAVE
A CONVERSATION IN THIS FORUM
BEFORE IT MIGHT COME BACK TO
COUNCIL BUT SOMETHING THAT
COULD BE EXPLORED POTENTIALLY
ON THE STAFF SIDE I THINK.
>> THANK ALL RIGHT.
AS ALWAYS.
OK, SO PETER, FOR FUTURE AGENDA
TOPICS, I JUST WONDERED WHEN
SOME OF THE RESULTS FROM OUR
NEW APD TRAFFIC PLAN PROCESS
ARE GOING TO COME IN ESPECIALLY
INTERESTED IN THE COLLABORATION
BETWEEN DIDI AND ENGINEERING TO
DISCUSS CRASH'S HOW IS THAT
TEAM HAD A CHANCE TO MEET YET
AND TO MEET YET AND IS THERE AN
OPPORTUNITY TO SHARE THEIR
RESULTS AND AND ONE OF OUR
MEETINGS
SEE A PHOTO OF SCHERBA
WANTS TO TRY ME ON THAT FIRST.
>> SURE.
SO TO ANSWER YOUR SECOND
QUESTION PLEASE MET WITH
ENGINEERING FOLKS AT THE FIRST
PART OF THE LAST THREE MONTHS
DISCUSSING THE PREVIOUS MONTHS
CALL OUTS AND SIGNIFICANT
INJURY CRASHES.
I CAN SAY KNOCK ON WOOD WE HAVE
WE KNOCK ON WOOD.
WE HAD ZERO CALL OUTS FOR
OCTOBER WHICH WAS EXCELLENT.
I HAVEN'T HAD ANY YET FOR FOR
NOVEMBER.
DOESN'T MEAN WE'RE NOT GOING TO
MEET WE STILL TAKE THOSE
CRASHES THAT ARE OF A
SIGNIFICANT NATURE THAT WEREN'T
CALLED OUT.
THUS THE DIFFERENT ASPECTS
OF THE INTERSECTION FACTORS
INVOLVED IN THE CRASH AND TRY
TO BREAK DOWN THINGS THAT THAT
WE CAN POTENTIALLY CHANGE OR IF
THERE'S ANY INFRASTRUCTURE OR
SITE A SITE OR ANYTHING LIKE
THAT THAT MIGHT BE A FACTOR IN
THE IN THE COLLISION.
SO WE HAVE AGAIN WE HAVE MET
THREE TIMES.
WE DON'T I DON'T I CAN SAY WE
HAVE NOT COME UP WITH ANYTHING
ON OUR ON OUR CRASHES THAT
WE'VE TALKED ABOUT THAT TODAY
THAT WAS ABSOLUTELY A FACTOR.
I KNOW THAT THERE WAS LAST
MONTH THERE WAS SOME TALK WITH
ENGINEERING TO MODIFY ONE
OF OUR INTERSECTIONS BUT WE'RE
WE'RE STILL LOOKING TO THAT
FURTHER.
AND THEN AS FAR AS A CRASH
TRAFFIC SAFETY PLAN, WE ARE
OFFICIALLY UNDERWAY WITH OUR
EDUCATION COMPONENT.
WE'VE GONE ONLINE FOR DIFFERENT
TIMES TO DIFFERENT GROUPS
INCLUDING THE FOLKS AT
LAOGHAIRE TERRACE, THE STATE
SERIOUS ASSOCIATION MAITRI
ASSOCIATION HAVE GOTTEN KIND
OF THE WORD OUT THAT IT'S
COMING.
THE OFFICIAL PLAN WILL TAKE
PLACE AND I'M KIND OF PUTTING
IT ON THE SAY ON THE BACK
BURNER.
IT WAS OUR LAST FOOTBALL HOME
FOOTBALL GAME WHICH IS
SATURDAY.
ONCE THAT'S DONE, WE'LL ROLL
THE PLAN OUT IN FULL FORCE AND
THERE'S OUR OFFICERS HAVE A
LITTLE BIT OF A LITTLE MORE
TIME ONCE THOSE HOME GAMES ARE
DONE TO GET THINGS ROLLED OUT.
SO I SHOULD HAVE SOME DATA FOR
YOU AS EARLY AS THE NEXT
MEETING ON HOW THINGS ARE GOING
IN THE INITIAL PHASE SIGNAGE
WISE WE'RE WORKING WITH
ENGINEERING TO ROLL OUT THE THE
SIGNAGE FOR OUR THREE QUARTERS
CITY.
I HAD A REALLY NICE
PRESENTATION THAT SHE SENT OVER
TO ME LAST WEEK THAT OUR
ADMINISTRATION APPROVED AS FAR
AS SIGNAGE FOR OUR PROPOSED
SIGNAGE FOR ALL THREE OF THE
CORRIDORS I TALKED ABOUT I
THINK IN AN EARLIER MEETING TO
THE CORRIDORS JACKSON AND
WASHTENAW STREET TRUNK LINE.
SO THERE'S A LITTLE BIT MORE
OF THE PROCESS AS FAR AS THE
PERMIT GOES TO POST SIGNAGE ON
THOSE.
BUT THE PACKARD ROAD OR WILL BE
THE FIRST ONE TO GET SIGNED.
WE'VE GOT REQUESTS FOR BIDS OUT
FOR THAT TO GET SOME COST TO
GET THOSE SIGNS PURCHASED AND
THEN WE'LL WORK ON INSTALLING
THEM.
BUT WE'RE ACTUALLY GOING TO
ROLL ROLL THE PLAN OUT PRIOR TO
THE SIGNS BEING INSTALLED.
WE'LL HAVE OUR OFFICERS WORK IN
THE CORRIDORS AND HAVE OUR
INFORMATIONAL HANDOUTS AND
AGAIN WE HAVE OUR INFORMATION
MEETINGS AND WE'LL START
ROLLING STUFF OUT ON SOCIAL
MEDIA AS EARLY AS I'LL SAY AS
EARLY AS NEXT WEEK.
BUT NO LATER THAN THE FIRST
PART OF DECEMBER.
THANKS.
OK, ALL RIGHT THANKS BUT THANKS
FOR ASKING P I THINK IF THERE'S
THAT RELEVANT DATA IN THE
FUTURE WE CAN WE SHOULD ROLL
THAT INTO FROM A PD ROLL IT
INTO THE STEP UP TO IT'S A GOOD
SPOT WHERE I I THINK IT'S A
GOOD PLACE FOR IT.
ALL RIGHT.
AS ALWAYS IF ANYONE HAS ANY
IDEAS FOR AGENDA TOPICS JUST
FEEL FREE TO EMAIL THEM TO ANY
OF US OR JUST MENTION ANY ANY
FORMAT THAT YOU CHOOSE OR
ALWAYS TO HAVE OR TOPICS THAT
TO THE LIST.
>> ALL RIGHT.
SO WITH THAT I'LL SAY THAT THE
NEXT MEETING WILL BE HELD ON
WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 18TH.
TWENTY TWENTY FOUR AT SEVEN
P.M. IT WILL ALSO BE A VIRTUAL
MEETING AND IF THERE ARE NO
OBJECTIONS WE WILL ADJOURN OUR
NOVEMBER 20TH TWENTY TWENTY
FOUR MEETING SEEING NO
OBJECTIONS THIS MEETING IS
ADJOURNED.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
THANKS